Project Gutenberg's Lace, Its Origin and History, by Samuel L. Goldenberg

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Lace, Its Origin and History

Author: Samuel L. Goldenberg

Release Date: February 24, 2012 [EBook #38973]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LACE, ITS ORIGIN AND HISTORY ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Keith Edkins and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)





Transcriber's note: A few typographical errors have been corrected: they
are listed at the end of the text.

       *       *       *       *       *


  _Lace
  Its Origin
  and
  History_

  _Samuel L. Goldenberg_

  [Illustration]

  _Brentano's
  New York
  1904_

COPYRIGHTED, 1904,
BY
SAMUEL L. GOLDENBERG.

[Illustration: BARBARA UTTMANN, A. D. 1561.]

    "I have here only a nosegay of culled flowers, and have brought nothing
    of my own but the thread that ties them together."--_Montaigne._

The task of the author of this work has not been an attempt to brush the
dust of ages from the early history of lace in the hope of contributing to
the world's store of knowledge on the subject. His purpose, rather, has
been to present to those whose relation to lace is primarily a commercial
one a compendium that may, perchance, in times of doubt, serve as a
practical guide.

Though this plan has been adhered to as closely as possible, the history of
lace is so interwoven with life's comedies and tragedies, extending back
over five centuries, that there must be, here and there in the following
pages, a reminiscent tinge of this association.

Lace is, in fact, so indelibly associated with the chalets perched high on
mountain tops, with little cottages in the valleys of the Appenines and
Pyrenees, with sequestered convents in provincial France, with the raiment
of men and women whose names loom large in the history of the world, and
the futile as well as the successful efforts of inventors to relieve tired
eyes and weary fingers, that, no matter how one attempts to treat the
subject, it must be colored now and again with the hues of many peoples of
many periods.

The author, in avowing his purpose to give this work a practical cast, does
not wish to be understood as minimizing the importance of any of the
standard works compiled by those whose years of study and research among
ancient volumes and musty manuscripts in many tongues have been a labor of
love. Rather would he pay the meed of tribute to those who have preserved
to posterity the facts bearing upon the early history of lace, which have
been garnered with such great care.

Nevertheless, most of these works, necessarily voluminous and replete with
detail, are more for the connoisseur or dilettante than for the busy man of
affairs upon whom the practical aspect of lace, quite dissociated from the
romance in which it is steeped, always forces itself.

It is for men of this type, and with no little misgiving, and a full
appreciation of how far short of his ideal the volume must be, that the
author has undertaken the compilation of this work.

  SAMUEL L. GOLDENBERG.

[Illustration]

{1}

LACE:

Its Origin and History.

       *       *       *       *       *

When where and how lace had its origin no one will pretend to say. There is
a general agreement, however, that lace, as the term is understood to-day,
is a comparatively modern product, it being impossible to identify any of
the antique specimens preserved from the ravages of time as belonging to a
period further back than the early part of the sixteenth century.

True it is that there are specimens of woven fabrics of a lacelike
character which were undoubtedly made at an earlier date, but most of the
authorities who have delved deep into the subject are of opinion that lace
probably does not antedate A. D. 1500.

A perusal of the available records in many tongues fails to make clear just
where lace was first made. Spain, Italy, Belgium, France and Germany have
all claimed the honor, and each has been able to present a great deal of
testimony in support of its contention; but the records of early times are
so meagre and indefinite that it is impossible to bestow the coveted honor
for the discovery of the art upon any one nation. {2}

The instrument that is responsible for lace is the needle, but the earliest
forms of lace were not the woven fabric that we know to-day, but rather
cutwork, which, as far as we have any authentic records, was first
practiced by the nuns in the convents of central and southern Europe. This
work was sometimes characterized as nun's work, and was designed almost
exclusively for altar decorations and the robes of prelates, though it was
also regarded as the insignia of rank and station. Some of the specimens of
this work, still preserved in museums, show that the early workers
possessed a skill in the art never excelled. Of course, with the progress
of time, designs have become more ornate and intricate, but many of the old
patterns still survive, and doubtless will continue to survive, till the
end of recorded time.

The desire to elaborate the edges of plain fabrics, whether of linen or
heavier material, was an entirely natural impulse to get away from the
harsh simplicity of the times. To this desire must be ascribed the
beginning of the mammoth lace industry of to-day.

One authority says that coeval with these styles of decoration was
drawnwork, in which the weft and warp threads of plain linen were drawn
out, thus forming a square of network made secure by a stitch at each
intersection. The design was afterward embroidered, frequently with colors.

Perhaps, all things considered, the lace industry received its greatest
impetus during the period known in history as the Renaissance, when Europe,
emerging from the severe and formal garb of the Medieval Age, began to
bedeck itself in the most graceful and beautiful manner.

A number of methods were employed in the production of the lace of that
brilliant period, the simplest of which consisted of forming the design
independently of the foundation. Threads spreading at even distances from a
common center served as a framework for others which were united in
squares, triangles, rosettes and other figures worked over with the
buttonhole stitch, forming in some portions openwork, in others solid
embroidery. This was, in fact, the first needle-made lace, and doubtless
its origin is due to the Venetians.

{3}

[Illustration: Real Flemish Point.]

[Illustration: Real Point de Venise.]

{4} Through constant practice the art was developed to a very high state by
the nuns, who taught their methods to the pupils of the convents, through
whom the knowledge passed to the peasantry, and thus became an important
industry. Perhaps, however, the development of the lace industry at this
period was due more to the spread of the methods by which it was
done--through books more than in any other manner--for it must be
remembered that contemporaneously with the development of the industry the
art of printing was in its first bloom.

As one traces the growth of lacemaking from the earliest times he is
impressed with the sharp advance made at the beginning of the seventeenth
century, when laceworkers, having practically exhausted the designs
possible by the then known methods, invented passementerie, which were
known as passements. These, speaking broadly, much resemble the
passementerie of to-day.

They were made of stout linen thread in imitation of high relief work of
the needle point, a thick thread being introduced to mark the salient
points of the pattern. Thus the term guipure was applied to the thread lace
with guipure reliefs, and the designation has since remained to all laces
without grounds, in which the patterns are united by brides.

In the beginning lace was made by two entirely distinct processes, in
commenting upon which we can do no better than to quote the words of Cole,
which are particularly lucid and concise. He says: "It is remarkable that
lacemaking should have sprung up or been invented at about the same period
of time by two entirely distinct processes without relationship or
evolution between them, and that the people of the countries wherein either
of the inventions was made were not only {5} unknown to each other, but
apparently neither had any knowledge of the processes of lacemaking
employed in the other country."

One of these processes is the employment of the needle and the single
thread, wherein the work was perfected mesh by mesh, each mesh being
completed as the work progressed.

The other process was by the use of many threads at once, each one attached
to bobbins, for the purpose only of separating them, the meshes being made
by twisting the threads a greater or less number of times. When each mesh
is only partially completed the thread is carried on to the next, and so
on, from side to side, the entire width of the fabric.

Felkin, in his history of embroidery and lace, says that when pillow lace
was invented--about the middle of the sixteenth century--the various kinds
of point lace then in use had reached a high state of perfection. Some
early writers after much laborious investigation assert that pillow lace
was first made in Flanders. In later years it has been almost universally
attributed to Barbara, wife of Christopher Uttman; she was then dwelling
with her husband at the Castle of St. Annaburg, Belgium, 1561. From the
castle, where she taught the peasantry as in a school, it soon spread over
the country, and women and girls of the district, finding that the making
of lace was more profitable than their former employment of embroidering
veils according to the Italian practice, adopted the Uttman method. No
trace of this mode of making lace (by use of pillow and bobbins) can be
found before this date; hence the presumption that these were the time and
place of the invention of bobbin lace. Barbara Uttman died in 1575. That
she was the true inventress is recorded on her tomb.

It will be seen from the foregoing that one process had its origin in
Italy, and the other its origin in Belgium, though, if we accept Felkin's
statement, we must accord to Italy the first honor, for he says {6}
distinctly that the Belgian peasantry gave up making lace according to the
Italian method to adopt the process invented by Barbara Uttman;
consequently, the Italian method must have been first. The present writer
disclaims any intention to dispose of this moot question, and is only led
to the above observation by reason of the high standing which Felkin's work
has attained.

There are two broad divisions of lace--namely, hand-made lace and
machine-made lace. In the world of commerce to-day the latter-named
product, which is but a child of the former, is vastly the more important.
This for the reason that hand-made lace, which is produced with such
arduous toil, skill and patience, is beyond the purse of the million, and
is and ever must be considered as one of the luxuries.

True, some of the simpler forms of hand-made lace are produced with
relatively great facility, and the price is correspondingly cheap, as
compared with the delicate, finely wrought designs, that it sometimes takes
years to produce. Nor is this the sole reason for the popularity of
machine-made laces, for to such perfection has the mechanical art of
lacemaking attained that it is practically impossible, even for experts, to
detect the difference between lace made by the deft, cunning fingers of
lady or maid from the lace made possible by modern machinery.

In hand-made lace the two principal classes are the needle-point and
bobbin, or pillow-made, lace. Needle-point lace is worked upon loose
threads laid upon a previously drawn pattern, but which have no point of
contact with one another and no coherency until the needlework binds them
together. This work is done with a needle and single thread. As we have
said, the pattern is first drawn, usually upon parchment; a piece of heavy
linen is stitched to the parchment for the purpose of holding it straight;
then threads to the number of two, three, four, or more, are laid along the
many lines of the pattern, and sewed lightly down through parchment and
linen. The entire figure is then carried out, both solid filling and
openwork, with fine stitching, the buttonhole stitch being most generally
employed.

{7}

[Illustration: Real Duchesse and Point Gaze.]

[Illustration: Real Carrick-ma-Cross.]

{8} Bobbin, or pillow-made, lace is the highest artistic development of
twisted and plaited threads. It is made from a large number of threads
attached by means of pins to an oval-shaped cushion or pillow, each thread
being wound upon a small bobbin. The design, as in the making of
needle-point lace, is first drawn on stiff paper or parchment, and
carefully stretched over the pillow. Then the pattern is pricked out along
the outline of the drawing and small pins are introduced at close
intervals, around which the threads work to form the various meshes and
openings. From right to left the thread is bound lightly upon the bobbins
and tied at the top of each in a loop that permits it gradually to slip off
the bobbin when gently pulled, as occurs generally when working.

The worker begins by interlacing the bobbins, which are used in pairs,
placing small pins in all perforations, and crossing the bobbins after the
insertion of each pin. Around these pins the design is formed, the threads
being crossed and recrossed and passed under and over each other with
remarkable rapidity and accuracy. When the whole width of the large piece
of lace is carried on together the number of bobbins and pins is very great
and the work highly expensive, but it is customary to work each sprig
separately, these being joined together in the form of a strip afterward by
means of a curious loop-stitch, made by a hook called a needle-pin.

Scarcely had lace been invented before it had assumed almost priceless
value, and it is worth while remarking here that though centuries have
since elapsed, the value of these delicate, hand-wrought fabrics has not in
any sense diminished. Throughout the sixteenth, seventeenth, eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries rare lace of beautiful pattern has been highly prized,
some of the earliest specimens, in the possession of world-famous libraries
and museums, being of relatively fabulous wealth.

{9}

[Illustration: Real Irish Point.]

[Illustration: Real Valenciennes.]

{10} By very reason of the conditions inevitably associated with its
making, lace must always remain one of the dearest articles of commerce,
for there is certainly nothing more rare or costly than these fine, dainty,
yet withal, substantial tissues.

Perhaps of all her compeers Venice attained the highest proficiency in the
production of beautiful lace. There, as we have remarked, needle-point had
its origin, and many of the beautiful patterns produced by the women of the
"Queen of the Adriatic" are even to-day the admiration of all who have a
true appreciation of the artistic.

Venice guarded the secret of her methods with jealous care, and it was many
years before the world was made familiar with the manner in which the
exquisite floral designs, with their wealth of minor adornments, were
worked out. Thus Italy was able to lay tribute upon the entire civilized
world, and her coffers were enriched to overflowing from the receipts of
the sales of lace to eastern, central and northern Europe.

Apropos of Italy's claim to the invention of needle-point, it has been
claimed that the Italians originally derived the art of fine needlework
from the Greek refugees in Italy, while another author asserts that the
Italians are indebted to the Saracens of Sicily for their knowledge. All
these claims, however, are merely speculative. For instance, no one
disputes that embroidery antedates lace, and yet we have authors who
endeavor to show that embroidery had its origin in Arabia, deducing from
this that lace, also, must have had its birth in one of the Oriental
countries. But it is a well-established fact that while we have absolute
knowledge of the existence of embroidery in the countries of the Levant,
there is absolutely no indication, of even the slightest value, that points
to the existence of lace before it was made by the Italians and Belgians.
{11}

In the municipal archives of Ferrara, dated 1469, is an allusion to lace,
but there is a document of the Sforza family, dated in 1493, in which the
word "trina" constantly occurs, together with "bone" and "bobbin" lace.

Spain was, as far as the records testify, the earliest and most adept pupil
of Italy in the art of lacemaking, though, as in Italy, at the beginning
the work was confined in the Iberian peninsula to the inmates of the
convents. Spain, too, achieved high distinction in this field, its Point
d'Espagne being one of the most celebrated of all the ancient laces, even
vying with the finest Venetian point. In those days, as will be recalled,
the power of the Church was absolute, and the use of laces for daily wear
was prohibited, though on Sundays and holidays it was greatly in evidence
in the attire of those of high station.

One of the most interesting facts concerning the development of lace has to
do with the patterns produced in the various localities of Europe. In the
beginning the number of designs was necessarily limited, but as the
industry developed and spread, and as the workers became more expert and
artistic, there was an uncontrollable impulse to break away from
conventional designs and to evolve new patterns. Then, too, there was
something of the spirit of pride behind this movement--a sort of local
patriotism, if it may so be termed. The Belgian, the Spaniard and the
Frenchman were not content slavishly to imitate Italian designs, and,
anxious to win a name for themselves, set about to produce new effects that
would immediately identify them with the place of their origin.

Thus it was, too, that various cities and towns in Italy, France, Belgium,
Spain and elsewhere sought to establish for themselves an individual
product of great excellence that would give to the city or town prestige
and renown in the then few commercial marts of the world. This explains the
various names which were given to distinct {12} types of laces hundreds of
years ago, and which designations still obtain, as, for instance, Alencon,
Valenciennes, Chantilly, Honiton, Arras, Bayeux, Genoa, Florence, etc.

Another fact worthy of record is that of all the almost numberless designs
that have been given to the world since the birth of lace there have been
some one or two characteristics that tell as plainly as though expressed in
words that each one of these designs was made at some particular period of
history. It is well that this is so, for it has enabled the historian to
trace, with more or less certainty, the development of the industry. In
other words, a lace expert is enabled to tell from the fabric not only in
what country it was made, but in what part of that country, and also the
approximate date.

In the self-sufficiency of the present age we are apt to regard with a sort
of supercilious disdain any story reflecting upon the supremacy of our
forebears in any of the arts or the sciences; but that we cannot make, in a
commercial way, such lace as was woven in the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries is beyond question. In the first place, time is lacking, and if
it must be confessed, the great skill that comes only through years of
constant practice is also lacking.

Modern real lace is artistic, even superior, but compared with such few
specimens as have come down to us of the work of the lacemakers of old, its
deficiency, particularly in the matter of the fineness of the execution and
thread, is at once apparent. Hand-made lace is to-day produced all over the
world; commercially its production is confined to France, Belgium, Germany,
Spain, Italy and England, where large quantities are still produced.
France, however, with that fostering care which she has bestowed upon her
many other arts, and with that keen appreciation of the beautiful that is
so inherent in her people, is far in the van in the matter of producing
hand-made lace, though in respect to two or three types Belgium is in the
front rank. {13}

[Illustration: Real Honiton.]

[Illustration: Real Florentine.]

{14}

Coming down to the question of machine-made lace, it is necessary to
observe at the outset that the same distinctions that exist between the
genuine and the imitation do not obtain as applied to these fabrics. In
other words, the knowledge that lace is a product of the frame rather than
the fingers in no sense condemns it. For to such a high plane has the
mechanical production of lace been lifted that one is almost tempted to say
that the products vie in beauty of design and perfection of finish with the
lace produced by hand. That there is warrant for this seeming exaggeration
is borne out by the fact that not infrequently it is impossible for experts
to tell the difference between two specimens of lace of the same design,
one made by hand and the other by machine.

What inventors have accomplished in this respect is truly marvelous. In the
beginning their efforts were not at all satisfactory, and the history of
machine-made lace abounds with pathetic instances of men who sought in vain
to duplicate with fidelity, by means of mechanical devices of hundreds of
types and patterns, the dextrous touch of the human hand.

W. Felkin, in his history of lace manufacture, says that lace net was first
made by machinery in 1768. Other authorities place the date as between 1758
and 1760. In 1809 bobbin net was invented, and in 1837 the Jacquard system
was applied to the bobbinet machine.

Mrs. B. Palliser, in "The History of Lace," says of the invention of
machinery for the production of lace that the credit is usually assigned to
Hammond, a stocking framework knitter of Nottingham, who, examining one day
the broad lace on his wife's cap, thought he could apply his machine to the
production of a similar article. His attempt so far succeeded that, by
means of the stocking frame invented in the previous century, he produced,
in 1768, not lace, but a kind of knitting of running loops or stitches.
{15}

In 1777 Else and Harvey introduced at Nottingham the pin or point net
machine, so named because made on sharp pins or points. Point net was
followed by various other stitches of a lacelike character, but despite the
progress made, all efforts at producing a solid net were futile. It was
still nothing more than knitting, a single thread passing from one end of
the frame to the other, and if a thread broke the work was unraveled. This
was overcome in a measure by gumming the threads, giving the fabric a
solidity and body not possible without resorting to some artificial method
of this sort.

The great problem inspired the efforts of numberless inventors, and many
attempts were made to combine the mechanism used respectively by the
knitter and the weaver, and after many failures a machine was produced
which made Mechlin net.

There are few histories bearing upon the invention of labor-saving devices
that are so replete with the records of failure as is the history of the
attempt to produce a practical lace machine. John Heathcoat, of
Leicestershire, England, was the inventor of the machine for making bobbin
net. His patents were taken out in 1809, and to him must be accorded the
credit of solving for the first time the problem that had vexed the minds
of so many inventors and had depleted the purses of so many capitalists.

The bobbin net machine, so named because the threads are wound upon
bobbins, first produced a net about an inch in width, afterward, however,
producing it a yard wide.

It was the application of the celebrated Jacquard attachment to the lace
machine that has made possible the duplication of practically every pattern
of lace made by hand. The machine of Heathcoat was vastly improved by John
Leavers, also of Nottingham, and the types produced by him are still in use
throughout England and France, though, of course, there are in these days a
large number of different {16} types of machines bearing different names,
but the principle of the Leavers machine, more or less modified, obtains in
practically all of the devices. Therefore a description of the process of
lacemaking by the Leavers frame will serve as a description for all.

The number of threads brought into operation in this machine is regulated
by the pattern to be produced. The threads are of two sorts, warp and
bobbin threads. Upward of 9,000 are sometimes used, sixty pieces of lace
being made at once, each piece requiring 148 threads (100 warps and 48
bobbin threads). The supply of warp threads is held upon reels, the bobbins
carrying their own supply. The warp threads are stretched perpendicularly
and about wide enough apart to admit a silver quarter passing edgeways
between them. The bobbins are flattened in shape so as to pass conveniently
between the warps. Each bobbin can contain about 120 yards of thread. By
most ingenious mechanism varying degrees of tension can be imparted to warp
and bobbin threads as required. The bobbins, as they pass like pendulums
between the warp threads, are made to oscillate, and through this
oscillation the threads twist themselves or become twisted with the warp
threads, as required by the pattern that is being produced. As the twisting
takes place, combs compress the twistings, making them more compact. If the
bobbin threads be made tight and the warp threads slack, the latter will be
twisted upon the former; but if the warps are brought to a tension and the
bobbin threads be slack, then the latter will be twisted on the warps. The
combs are so regulated that they come clear away from the threads as soon
as they have pressed them together, and fall into position ready to perform
their pressing operations again. The contrivances for giving each thread a
particular tension and movement at a certain time are connected with an
adaptation of the Jacquard system of pierced cards. The lace machine is
highly complicated, much of its complexity being due to the mechanism by
which the oscillating or lateral movements are produced. Expert workmen
prepare the working drawings for the lace machine, and also perform the
more important duties in its operation, but a large part of the work is
carried on by women and girls.

{17}

[Illustration: Real Point Applique.]

{18} One of the most interesting developments of the lace industry has been
the gradual evolution from the work of the hand toilers to the utilization
of complex machinery. In addition to the Leavers machine, which is referred
to elsewhere in extenso, the embroidery machine plays a very important part
in the making of laces. From 1870 to 1880, various efforts had been made to
produce lace on the embroidery machine, and it was during this decade that
the first success was achieved in the making of Oriental or net laces in
Plauen. This was the first actual production of lace from the embroidering
machine, and this sort of lace, which still exists to-day, is really an
embroidery on a net, although usually designated as lace. A few years later
a discovery was made which effected a great change in the making of laces
on the embroidery machine. This was the principle of embroidering on a
material which was afterward removed by a chemical process. The first
article produced was called Guipure de Genes, and was at that time
patented, but the patent was held to be invalid, and a few years afterward
this article was generally produced both in St. Gall, where it first
appeared, and in Plauen. By this method of manufacture are produced to-day
all of the imitation guipure laces, such as Point de Venise, Rose Point,
Point de Genes, etc. {19}

[Illustration: Real Chantilly.]

[Illustration: Real Spanish.]

{20}

The embroidering machine in use at the present day is constructed entirely
of iron, measuring from 15 to 20 feet long, 9 feet high, 9 feet wide and
weighs about 3,800 pounds. It can be operated by hand or by power. The
method of embroidering is exceedingly simple. The cloth, usually somewhat
over 4-1/2 yards long, is tightly stretched in an upright position in the
center of the machine, each end of the suspended strip being held firmly by
means of stout hooks. The needles (from 150 to 300 in number, according to
the sort of work to be done) are arranged horizontally in a framework in a
straight, level row, all pointing toward the cloth and extending from end
to end of same. The needles are supplied with threads about one yard in
length, which are fastened by means of a peculiar knot to the eye, the
latter being in the middle of the needle instead of at the end. In
producing any given stitch in the pattern to be worked, the long row of
needles all move forward at once at the will of the operator, and thus
duplicate the stitch in every pattern or "section" along the entire 4-1/2
yards of cloth suspended in the machine. As may be readily understood, the
machine in this manner completes 4-1/2 yards of embroidery in the same time
it would take a woman with a needle to finish a single pattern. When one
row is completed the strip of cloth is raised and another row is made, and
so on until it is necessary to put in another length of cambric. This
machine is capable of making patterns from the very narrow up to the full
width of the cloth.

What is known as the Schiffli, or power machine, is very similar to the
hand-embroidering device, being an improvement on the latter and worked
with a shuttle in addition to the needles. Its capacity is nearly eight
times greater, or from 15,000 to 18,000 stitches per day, against 2,000 to
3,000 on the hand machine. To offset this advantage, however, the Schiffli
machine is much more expensive, and is of delicate and complicated
construction, easily got out of order and costly to repair. Until a
comparatively recent date the Schiffli was not considered as a competitor
of the hand machine, its work being inferior in quality and confined to
simple patterns. At present, however, it is generally conceded that the
goods produced by it not only compete with the hand-machine products, but
are already superseding the latter to some extent. It is predicted that the
Schiffli machine, operated by power, will ultimately supply all the
embroidery in the low and medium grades. {21}

The variety and adaptability of the designs which both of these machines
are capable of producing are endless, and at the same time comparatively
inexpensive. It is this latter fact which accounts for the great advantage
of the embroidering machine over the lace machine. The preparing and
setting of a design for a lace machine is very expensive, and the great
cost compels the manufacturer of machine lace to turn out large quantities
of one set pattern in order to get a return from his investment.

About the beginning of the nineteenth century, lace machines were first
introduced into France from Nottingham, at Boulogne-sur-mer, where the
industry remained for a few years and then moved to Calais. There this
industry has developed and increased to such proportions that Calais is now
the principal city for the production of fine laces of all kinds, and
practically leads Nottingham in creating novelties and new and original
effects. Shortly after the Franco-Prussian war the industry found a
foothold in Caudry, in the north of France, where it has also developed to
quite large proportions, and shares to-day a large part of the trade which
has resulted from the founding of the parent industry in Calais. The kind
of lace produced in Caudry is generally of a cheaper character than that
produced in Calais.

In Lyons, too, there has been established for many years the industry of
making laces and nettings by mechanical processes. This is still a very
large industry, and about twenty years ago there was a large trade done
with America in the manufacture of laces in vogue at that time, which were
the imitation of the real Spanish, called "Blonde Grenade." There are still
made in Lyons to-day various imitations of fine laces, which in a general
way are of a different quality to the laces made at Calais or Caudry, and
Lyons enjoys a reputation in regard to the character of the laces it
produces which is unique in the trade.

About the year 1890, a Frenchman invented a machine similar in {22}
principle to the knitting machine, which reproduces with absolute fidelity
the work of the bobbins in making pillow laces. Through this invention he
was able to imitate such hand-made laces as Torchons, Medicis, etc., so
exactly that experts could not detect the difference. In fact, it is the
general testimony of men associated with laces for years, that the work of
this machine in a great many of its aspects is one of the most important
contributions of the mechanical arts in the production of lace.

Through the importation of foreign machines and foreign workmen, various
attempts have been made in the United States to establish the manufacture
of lace. At the present writing it is impossible to state with any
definiteness what the result will be, as the experiment has been of only a
few years' duration, and in the very nature of things is at this date of a
tentative character.

In order that the reader may be able to distinguish the various types of
hand and machine made laces, we append herewith a glossary, defining as
concisely as possible the characteristics that indicate not only the
manifold makes of laces, but what may be called the various sub-divisions.
These definitions are set forth, the writer hopes, in terms that will
enable the reader to understand what each one of the various names means,
both as applied commercially and descriptively. {23}

[Illustration: Real Point Gaze.]

[Illustration: Imitation Duchesse.]

{24}

CHARACTERISTICS OF THE DIFFERENT TYPES OF LACE.

ALENCON.--A fine, needle-point lace, so called from Alencon, a French city,
in which its manufacture was first begun. It is the only French lace not
made upon the pillow, the work being done entirely by hand, with a fine
needle, upon a parchment pattern in small pieces. The pieces are afterward
united by invisible seams. There are usually twelve processes, including
the design employed in the production of a piece of this kind of lace, and
each of these processes is executed by a special workwoman; but in 1855, at
Bayeux, in France, a departure was made from the old custom of assigning a
special branch of the work to each lacemaker, and the fabric was made
through all its processes by one worker.

The design is engraved upon a copper plate and then printed off upon pieces
of green parchment of a specified length. After the pattern is pricked upon
the parchment, which is stitched to a piece of coarse linen folded double,
the pattern is then formed in outline by guiding two flat threads along the
edge by the thumb of the left hand, and, in order to fix it, minute
stitches are made with another thread and needle through the holes of the
parchment. After the outline is finished it is given to another worker to
make the ground, which is chiefly of two kinds: bride, consisting of
uniting threads which serve to join together the flowers of the lace, and
reseau, which is worked backward and forward from the footing to the picot.
There was also another ground called Argentella, consisting of
buttonhole-stitched skeleton hexagons.

In making the flowers of Alencon point, the workwoman, using a needle and
fine thread, makes the buttonhole-stitch from left to right, and, when she
has reached the end of the flower, throws back the thread from the point of
departure and works again from left to right {25} along the thread. As a
result, the work is characterized by a closeness, firmness and evenness not
equaled in any other point lace.

When the work is completed the threads which bind lace, linen and parchment
together are carefully cut, and the difficult task of uniting the pieces
together remains to be done. This is accomplished by means of what is
called the "assemblage" stitch, instead of the "point de raccroc," where
the pieces are united by a fresh row of stitches.

Another way of uniting the pieces, which is used at Alencon, is by a seam
which follows as far as possible the outlines of the pattern so as to be
invisible. A steel instrument, called a picot, is then passed into each
flower so as to give it a more finished appearance.

Alencon point is of a durability which no other lace can rival. A
peculiarity in its manufacture is, that it is the only lace in which
horsehair is inserted along the edge to give increased strength to the
cordonnet, a practice originating in the necessity of making the point
stand up when the tall headdresses formerly worn by women were exposed to
the wind.

Formerly Alencon point, notwithstanding its beauty of construction, could
not vie with Brussels lace as regards the excellence of floral design, but
this inferiority has now been removed by the production of exquisite copies
of natural flowers, mingled with grasses and ferns. Alencon point is now
made not only at the seat of its original manufacture, but at Bayeux, at
Burano, near Venice, and at Brussels.

Bayeux can boast of one of the finest examples of this lace ever made. It
was exhibited in 1867, and consisted of a dress of two flounces, in which
the pattern, flowers and foliage were most harmoniously wrought and
relieved by shaded tints, which give to the lace the relief of a picture.
The price of the dress was $17,000, and it took forty women seven years to
finish it.

The city of Alencon had on exhibition at Paris, in 1899, a piece of {26}
lace of exquisite description, that had taken 16,500 working days to
complete.

ALLOVER.--Lace of any kind which is eighteen inches or more in width, and
used for yokes, flouncings and entire costumes.

ANTIQUE.--A pillow lace, hand-made from heavy linen thread, and
characterized by an exceedingly open, coarse, square mesh. It is mainly
used for curtains, bed sets and draperies.

ANTWERP.--A pillow lace made at Antwerp, resembling early Alencon, and
whose chief characteristic is the representation of a pot or vase of
flowers with which it is always decorated. The pot or vase varies much in
size and details. It is usually grounded with a coarse "Fond Champ."

APPLICATION.--A lace made by sewing flowers or sprigs, which may be either
needle-point or bobbin-made, upon a bobbin-lace ground. One variety of
Brussels lace affords the best example of Application.

APPLIQUE.--The same as Application lace.

ARGENTAN.--A needle-point lace, usually considered indistinguishable from
Alencon, but which is different in some respects, its marked peculiarity
being that the reseau ground is not made of single threads only, but the
sides of each mesh are worked over with the buttonhole stitch. Argentan is
often distinguished from Alencon lace by a larger and more striking
pattern, and in some instances it is especially known by its hexagonally
arranged brides. It is called after Argentan, a town near Alencon, and the
lace was made there under the same direction.

ARRAS.--A white pillow lace, so called from Arras, in France, the city of
its original manufacture. It is simple and almost uniform in design, very
strong and firm to the touch, and comparatively cheap in price. It is made
on a lisle ground. The older and finer patterns of Arras lace reached their
climax of excellence during the first Empire, between 1804 and 1812, but
since then they have gone out of fashion. {27}

[Illustration: Real Duchesse.]

[Illustration: Real Irish Crochet.]

{28}

AURILLAC.--A pillow or bobbin lace, made at Aurillac, in France. In the
early period of its manufacture it was a close-woven fabric, resembling the
guipure of Genoa and Flanders, but later it resembled English point. The
laces of Aurillac ended with the Revolution.

AUVERGNE.--A pillow lace made at the French city of Auvergne and the
surrounding district.

AVE MARIA.--A narrow lace used for edging. (See Dieppe lace.)

BABY.--A narrow lace used for edging, and made principally in the English
counties of Bedfordshire, Buckinghamshire and Northamptonshire. These laces
are ordinarily of simple design and specially employed in adorning infants'
caps. Though this fashion went out in Great Britain, the ladies of America
held to the trimmed infants' caps until the breaking out of the Civil War,
and up to that date large quantities of this lace were exported to America.

BASKET.--A lace so woven or plaited as to resemble basket-work. It is
mentioned in inventories of 1580.

BAYEUX.--There are two descriptions of lace known by this name: (a) A
modern pillow lace, made at Bayeux, in Normandy, particularly the variety
made in imitation of Rose point; (b) A black silk lace, popular because
made in unusually large pieces, as for shawls, fichus, etc.

BISETTE.--A narrow, coarse-thread pillow lace of three qualities, formerly
made in the suburbs of Paris by the peasant women, principally for their
own use. The name is now used to signify narrow bordering lace of small
value.

BOBBIN.--Lace made on a pillow, stuffed so as to form a cushion, without
the use of a needle. A stiff piece of parchment is fixed on the pillow, and
after holes are pricked through the parchment so as to form the pattern
small pins are stuck through these holes into the pillow. The threads with
which the lace is formed are wound upon bobbins--small, round pieces of
wood about the size of a pencil, having round their upper ends a deep
groove, so formed as to reduce the bobbin to a thin neck, on which the
thread is wound, a separate bobbin being used for each thread. The ground
of the lace is formed by the twisting and crossing of these threads. The
pattern or figure, technically called "gimp," is made by interweaving a
thread much thicker than that forming the groundwork, according to the
design pricked out on the parchment. This manner of using the pillow in
lacemaking has remained practically the same during more than three
centuries. {29}

[Illustration: Real Irish Applique.]

[Illustration: Imitation Point de Venise.]

{30}

BLONDE.--A lace so-called because, being made from raw silk, it was "fair,"
not white in color. Blonde lace has a "reseau" of the Lille type, made of
fine twisted silk, the "toile" being worked entirely with a broad, flat
strand, producing a very attractive glistening effect. It was made at
Chantilly, in France. At the Revolution the demand for this fabric ceased,
as lacemakers were commonly looked upon as royal proteges. During the First
Empire, however, blonde became fashionable again, and since that time the
popularity of black silk blonde for Spanish mantillas alone has kept the
trade in a flourishing condition. The manufacture is not confined to any
one town, but is carried on throughout the province of Calvados, in
Normandy, and is also made in Spain.

BOBBINET.--A variety of Application lace, in which the pattern is applied
upon a ground of bobbinet or tulle.

BONE POINT.--A lace without a regular mesh ground.

BORDER.--Lace made in long, narrow pieces, with a footing on one side, the
other edge being ordinarily Van Dyked or purled. During the larger part of
the seventeenth century a constant supply of this lace was made at Genoa.
It was commonly called "Collar" lace, from the use to which it was put. In
the pictures of Rubens and Van Dyke it is frequently represented as
trimming the broad falling linen collars, both of men and elderly women. It
can be distinguished from Flemish lace, also employed in the same way, by
its greater boldness of design. {31} Younger women also made use of it as
trimming for the shoulders of their decollete dresses, and also for
sleeves, aprons, etc.

BRIDE.--Lace whose ground is wholly composed of brides or bars, without a
reseau or net.

BRUSSELS.--A celebrated lace, made at and near Brussels, in Belgium; more
particularly, a fine variety of the lace made there whose pattern, as
compared with Alencon, has less relief, and whose fine net ground is
without "picots," the knots or thorns which often decorate "brides," and
also the edge of the pattern. Brussels lace, whose history is one of the
most interesting in the progress of this industry, is now often regarded as
an application lace, by reason of the fact that the laceworkers of that
city, after machine-made net had been perfected by an English invention in
1810, adopted the plan of appliqueing their pillow-made patterns on that
material. Lace so appliqued can be recognized as distinct from that made
with the "vrai reseau," or true network ground, by the fact that the net
ground, though sometimes removed, is often seen to pass behind the lace
pattern, and also by the character of the network. Machine-made net is
composed of diamond-shaped meshes, and is made with two threads only,
tightly twisted and crossed, not plaited, at their junction, and is quite
unlike the Brussels pillow "reseau." Other peculiarities by which Brussels
lace may be recognized are: (a) It is not made in one piece on the pillow,
but the pattern is first made by itself, and the "reseau" ground is worked
in around it afterward. (b) The "reseau" ground, when magnified under a
glass, has a mesh of hexagonal form, of which two sides are made of four
threads plaited four times, and four sides of two threads twisted twice.
(c) Brussels pillow lace has two sorts of "toile," or substance of the
pattern as contrasted with the groundwork; one, the usual woven texture,
resembling that of a piece of cambric; the other, a more open arrangement
of open threads, having very much the appearance of {32} the Fond Champ
"reseau." It remains to be said, in spite of the fact that the
above-mentioned characteristics may always be distinguished, that the
Brussels pillow lace of the present day differs materially from the earlier
forms, having gone through many changes and style in pattern and make.
Among these are Point d'Angleterre, called such for mistaken reasons only,
as it is not point lace nor made in England; and Duchesse, a name of
comparatively recent date, though the style itself is of earlier origin,
and was called "Guipure facon Angleterre." As regards Brussels
needle-point, the earliest made closely resembles that of Alencon, though
not quite so close and firm. There were also other differences, both the
"cordonnet" and the "reseau" being unlike those of Alencon. From the
beginning of the nineteenth century Brussels needle-point underwent changes
analogous to those of pillow lace; it became Point Applique, in which the
needle-lace pattern, instead of having a true net ground, was appliqued on
the machine-made net. But in recent years it has been noted that a return
to the character of the earlier and more beautiful Brussels needle-point is
being sought, the chief evidence of it being the exquisite Point Gaze, made
entirely with the needle and grounded with its own "reseau."

BUCKINGHAM.--A lace originally made in the county of Buckingham, England,
and of two kinds: (a) Buckingham trolley lace, whose pattern is outlined
with a thicker thread, or a flat, narrow border, made up of several such
threads. The ground is usually a double ground, showing hexagonal and
triangular meshes; (b) A lace with a point ground, with the pattern
outlined with thicker threads, these threads being weighted by bobbins
larger and heavier than the rest. In general character and design these
laces strongly resemble those manufactured at Lille.

CADIZ.--A variety of needle-point Brussels lace. {33}

[Illustration: Imitation Marquise.]

[Illustration: Real Point d'Angleterre.]

{34}

CARNIVAL.--A variety of reticella lace made in Italy, Spain and France
during the sixteenth century.

CARTISANE.--Guipure or passement, made with cartisane, which is vellum or
parchment in thin strips or small rolls, covered with silk, gold thread or
similar material.

CHAIN.--A lace of the seventeenth century, consisting of a braid or
passement so worked as to resemble chain links. It was made of colored
silk, and also of gold and silver thread.

CHANTILLY.--One of the blonde laces, of the sort recognizable by their
Alencon reseau ground and the flowers in light or openwork instead of
solid. It is made both in white and black silk. Black Chantilly lace has
always been made of silk, but a grenadine, not a lustrous silk. The pattern
is outlined with a cordonnet of a flat, untwisted silk strand. During the
seventeenth century the Duchesse of Longueville established the manufacture
of silk lace at Chantilly and its neighborhood, and as Paris was near and
the demand of royalty for this lace increased it became very popular. At
the time of the Revolution the prosperity of the industry was ruined, and
many of the lacemakers were sent to the guillotine. During the ascendancy
of the first Napoleon, the manufacture of Chantilly again became
flourishing. Since then the industry has been driven away from that town on
account of the higher labor costs resulting from the nearness of Chantilly
to Paris, and the lacemakers, unable to meet this increased cost, retired
to Gisors, where half a century ago there were between 8,000 and 10,000
lacemakers. The supremacy of lacemaking formerly enjoyed by Chantilly has
now been transferred to Calvados, Caen, Bayeux and Grammont. The
widely-known Chantilly shawls are made at Bayeux, and also at Grammont.

CHENILLE.--A French lace, made in the eighteenth century, so called because
the patterns were outlined with fine white chenille. The ground {35} was
made of silk in honeycomb reseau, and the patterns were geometrical and
filled with thick stitches.

CLUNY.--A kind of net lace with a square net background in which the stitch
is darned. It is so called from the famous museum of antiquities in the
Hotel Cluny, at Paris, and also because the lace was supposed to have a
medieval appearance. The patterns used are generally of an antique and
quaint description, mostly of birds, animals and flowers, and in the
existing manufacture the old traditions are fairly well preserved.
Sometimes a glazed thread is introduced in the pattern as an outline. Cluny
is a plaited lace, somewhat similar to the Genoese and Maltese laces, and
is made in silk, linen or cotton.

CORDOVER.--A kind of filling used in the pattern of ancient and modern
point lace.

CORK.--A name formerly used for Irish lace in general, when the manufacture
of Irish lace was principally confined to the neighborhood of Cork.

CRAPONNE.--A kind of stout thread guipure lace, of cheap price and inferior
make, used for furniture.

CRETAN.--A name given to an old lace, ordinarily made of colored material,
whether silk or linen, and sometimes embroidered with the needle after the
lace was complete.

CREWEL.--A kind of edging made of crewel or worsted thread, intended as a
border or binding for garments.

CROCHET.--Lace which is made with a crochet hook, or whose pattern is so
made and then appliqued on a bobbin or machine-made net. It is similar to
needle-point lace, although not equal in fineness to the best examples of
the latter.

CROWN.--A lace whose pattern was worked on a succession of crowns,
sometimes intermixed with acorns and roses. It was made first in the reign
of Queen Elizabeth. A relic of this lace may still be found {36} in the
"faux galon," sold for the decoration of fancy dresses and theatrical
purposes.

DALECARLIAN.--Lace made for their own use by the peasants of Dalecarlia, a
province of Sweden. Its patterns are ancient and traditional. It is a
coarse guipure lace, made of unbleached thread.

DAMASCENE.--An imitation of Honiton lace, made by joining lace sprigs and
lace braid with corded bars. It differs from modern point lace in that it
has real Honiton sprigs, and is without needlework fillings.

DARNED LACE.--A general name for lace upon a net ground, upon which the
pattern is appliqued in needlework. The different laces of this kind are
described under Filet Brode, Guipure d'Art and Spiderwork.

DEVONSHIRE.--Lace made in Devonshire, England, and more frequently
designated as Honiton. (See Honiton.) Formerly practically the whole female
population of Devonshire were employed in lacemaking, and during the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries Belgian, French and Spanish laces were
imitated in that country most successfully, as were also Venetian and
Spanish needle-point, Maltese, Greek and Genoese laces. During the last
century this variety in lacemaking has died out in Devonshire, and now only
Honiton is made.

DIAMOND.--A lace made with a stitch either worked as open or close
diamonds, and used in modern point and in ancient needle-points.

DIEPPE.--A fine point lace made at Dieppe, in France, resembling
Valenciennes, and made with three threads instead of four. There were
several kinds of lace made at Dieppe in the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries, including Brussels, Mechlin, Point de Paris and Valenciennes,
but the true Dieppe point was eventually restricted to two kinds, the
narrow being called the Ave Maria and Poussin, the wider and double
grounded, the Dentelle a la Vierge. Dieppe and Havre were formerly the two
great lace centers of Normandy, manufacturing in those cities having
antedated that at Alencon, but the prosperity of the lace industry in both
these cities was nearly destroyed at the Revolution, and though for a time
encouraged under the restored Bourbons, and patronized by Napoleon III,
machine-made laces have practically driven the old Dieppe point out of the
market. {37}

[Illustration: Real Torchon.]

[Illustration: Imitation Valenciennes.]

{38}

DRESDEN POINT.--A fine drawn lace, embroidered with the needle and made in
Dresden during the latter part of the seventeenth and the whole of the
eighteenth century. It was an imitation of an Italian point lace, in which
a piece of linen was converted into lace by some of its threads being drawn
away, some retained to form a pattern, and others worked together to form
square meshes. The manufacture of Dresden point declined, and now laces of
many kinds are made there, notably an imitation of old Brussels.

DUCHESSE.--A fine pillow lace, a variety originally made in Belgium
resembling Honiton guipure lace in design and workmanship, but worked with
a finer thread and containing a greater amount of raised or relief work.
The leaves, flowers and sprays formed are larger and of bolder design. The
stitches and manner of working in Honiton and Duchesse are alike.

DUNKIRK.--A pillow lace made with a flat thread, and whose manufacture was
carried on in the districts around Dunkirk, a French seaport, in the
seventeenth century. The best known kind was an imitation of Mechlin lace.

DUTCH.--A coarse, strong lace, made with a thick ground, and of plain and
heavy design. It is a kind of cheap Valenciennes. Dutch lace is inferior in
design and workmanship to those of France and Belgium.

ENGLISH POINT.--(a) A fine pillow lace made in the eighteenth century,
generally considered to be of Flemish origin and manufacture, {39} and
mistakenly called "Point d'Angleterre," as it was neither point lace nor
made in England. Some writers, however, assert its English origin. Owing to
the protection formerly given by law to English laces, large quantities of
Belgium laces are believed to have been smuggled into England under the
name of "Point d'Angleterre," so as to evade the customs duties. (b) At the
present day the finest quality of Brussels lace, in which needle-point
sprigs are applied to Brussels bobbin-ground. (See Application lace, also
Point d'Angleterre.)

ESCURIAL.--A modern silk lace, made in imitation of Rose point. The
patterns are outlined with a lustrous thread or cord.

FAYAL.--A delicately made and costly lace, hand-made by the women of the
Island of Fayal, one of the Azores, off the western Spanish coast. The
thread used in making this lace is spun from the fiber of the leaves of the
aloe, a plant resembling somewhat the century plant. Great skill is
necessary in the manufacture, which is restricted to a comparatively few
women of the island, who have been trained to this work from childhood. The
lace is marketed in France, chiefly in Paris, at a very high price, and it
is very difficult for outside purchasers to buy it at any cost. The
patterns are extremely elegant and original in design. Notwithstanding the
delicacy of this fabric, it is remarkably durable.

FEDORA.--See Point Applique.

FALSE VALENCIENNES.--(a) Lace resembling Valenciennes in surface and in
pattern, but without the true Valenciennes net ground, (b) A term for
Valenciennes lace made in Belgium.

FLAT POINT.--Lace made without any raised-work or work in relief from
raised points.

FLEMISH POINT.--A needle-point guipure lace made in Flanders.

FOOTING.--A narrow lace which is used to keep the stitches of the {40}
ground firm and to sew the lace to the garment upon which it is to be worn.
Sometimes the footing is worked with the rest of the design. It is used
also in making lace handkerchiefs and for quilling effects.

GENOA.--A name originally given to the gold and silver laces for which
Genoa was famed in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, but now applied
to lace made from the fiber of the aloe plant, and also to Macrame lace.

GOLD.--Lace made of warp threads or cords of silk, or silk and cotton
combined, with thin gold or silver gilt bands passing around it. It was
anciently made of gold or silver gilt wire. It is now used chiefly to
decorate uniforms, liveries and some church costumes, and occasionally for
millinery. The metal is drawn through a wire, and, after being flattened
between steel rollers, several strands of the flattened wire are passed
around the silk simultaneously by means of a complex machine having a wheel
and iron bobbins. The history of gold lace is interesting, as illustrating
the oldest form of the lacemaker's art. From the days of Egypt and Rome
down to medieval Venice, Italy and Spain, gold and silver gilt wire were
used in making this kind of lace. The Jews in Spain were accomplished
workers in this art, and in Sweden and Russia gold lace was the first lace
made. In France gold lacemaking was a prosperous manufacture at Aurrillac
and Arras, at which latter place it flourished up to the end of the
eighteenth century. Gold lace was imported into England at an early date,
and King James I established a monopoly in it. Its importation was
prohibited by Queen Anne, on account of the extravagant uses of
ornamentation to which it was put, and it was also prohibited in the reign
of George II, to correct the prevalent taste for the foreign manufactured
lace. The attempt was unsuccessful, for we are told that smuggling greatly
increased. It became a "war to the knife between the revenue officer and
society at large, all classes combined, town ladies of high degree, with
waiting-maids, and the common sailor, to avoid the obnoxious duties and
cheat the government." {41}

[Illustration: Real Mechlin.]

[Illustration: Real Point de Paris.]

{42}

GRAMMONT.--Grammont lace, so called from the town of Grammont, in Belgium,
where it was originally manufactured, is of two kinds: (a) A cheap, white
pillow lace. (b) A black silk lace, resembling the Chantilly blondes. These
laces are made for flounces and shawls, and were used both in America and
Europe. As compared with Chantilly, the ground is coarser and the patterns
are not so clear-cut and elegant as the real Chantilly.

GUEUSE.--A thread pillow lace made in France during the eighteenth century.
The ground of this lace was reseau, and the toile was worked with a thicker
thread than the ground. It was formerly an article of extensive consumption
in France, but, after the beginning of the nineteenth century, it was
little used, except by the poorer classes. It was formerly called "Beggars'
lace."

GUIPURE.--It was originally a kind of lace or passement made of cartisane
and twisted silk. The name was afterward applied to heavy lace made with
thin wires whipped around the silk, and with cotton thread. The word
guipure is no longer commonly used to denote such work as this, but has
become a term of variable designation, and it is so extensively applied
that it is difficult to give a limit to its meaning. It may be used to
define a lace where the flowers are either joined by brides, or large
coarse stitches, or lace that has no ground. The modern Honiton and Maltese
are guipures, and so is Venetian point. But as the word has also been
applied to large, flowing pattern laces, worked with coarse net grounds, it
is impossible to lay down any hard and fast rule about it.

HENRIQUES.--A fine stitch or point, used both in early and modern
needle-point work.

{43}

[Illustration: Real Arabian.]

[Illustration: Machine Irish Crochet.]

{44} HOLLIE POINT.--A needle-point lace said to have been originally called
holy point, on account of its uses. It was popular in the middle ages for
church decoration, but was adapted to different purposes in the seventeenth
and eighteenth centuries, and various makes of lace have since been called
by this name.

HONITON.--A pillow lace originally made at Honiton, Devonshire, England,
and celebrated for the beauty of its figures and sprigs. The manufacture is
still carried on at that town, where there is a lace school, but a similar
lace is made in the leading Continental centers of the industry.

(a) Honiton Application is made by working the pattern parts on the lace
pillow and securing them to a net ground, separately made. At present it is
customary to use machine-made net upon which hand-made sprays are sewn.

(b) Honiton guipure, which in common acceptation passes as Honiton lace, is
distinguished by its large flower patterns upon a very open ground, the
sprays being united by brides or bars.

Honiton braid is a narrow, machine-made fabric, the variety in most general
use being composed of a series of oval-shaped figures united by narrow
bars. It is of different widths, in linen, cotton and silk, and is much
used in the manufacture of handkerchiefs, collars, and some varieties of
lace.

The history of Honiton lace is more than ordinarily interesting, partly by
reason of the doubt as to whether it really was a lace of English
invention, or brought by the Flemish workmen to England. Some writers
assert the former, but the stronger probability is that the art was brought
from Flanders by Protestant immigrants, who fled from persecution.
Whichever theory is held, the development of the industry at Honiton, and
its close resemblance to other lacemaking processes in Belgium, Holland and
France, afford an excellent illustration of the interdependence of
lacemakers in all countries upon each {45} other as regards improvements
resulting from new ideas. Honiton, if it was brought from Flanders
originally, afterward repaid the debt by the beauty and celebrity of its
designs, which served as examples for Continental lacemakers. The very
attempt to protect its manufacture in England, by imposing prohibitive
duties, only increased the desire to receive foreign suggestions, and to
smuggle foreign laces into England, while the ingenuity of Continental
manufacturers succeeded in copying the best Honiton designs, and even in
improving upon them. The English lacemakers at Honiton were, however, at
first unsuccessful in their attempts to rival the best laces of the
Continent, especially Brussels. Although they had royal patronage, and the
whims and lavish expenditure of the court of Charles II were at their
service, together with protective duties, it was not until the reign of
George II and George III that English lace substantially improved. This
resulted from substituting the working of the true Brussels net ground, or
vrai reseau, for the old guipure bar ground. The patterns were also formed
of detached flower sprays, and soon the Honiton product became almost
unrivaled. This superiority continued until about 1820, when machine-made
net was introduced, and the old exquisite net ground, made of the finest
Antwerp thread, went out of fashion by reason of the commercial demand for
an inferior product. Honiton guipure is now the chief form of lace made at
that town. As regards composition of the patterns of Honiton laces, as well
as finish and delicacy of execution, much improvement has been manifested
during the last twenty years by reason of better schools for design, and
the rivalry promoted by international exhibitions.

IMITATION.--Machine-made lace of any kind. It often rivals real lace in
fineness, but necessarily its mechanical regularity of pattern detracts
somewhat from the artistic character of the result. Constant improvement in
processes, however, has in some laces made the {46} resemblance to the
hand-made product so close that even experts can hardly recognize the
difference. If it were asked how the imitation lace can be distinguished
from needle-point, the answer is that it is not made with looped stitches
like the latter, nor has it the effect of plaited threads, as in pillow
lace. Again, the toile of machine-made lace is often found to be ribbed,
and this lace is very generally made of cotton instead of the linen thread
with which old needle-point and pillow lace is made. In the invention of
substitutes for hand-made lace stitches Switzerland has been the leader,
and by 1868 hundreds of machines, perfected from the invention of a native
of St. Gall, were turning out a close imitation of the hand-made work. The
most recent triumphs of this description are the imitations of Venetian
point, in which a nearer approximation than ever before has been made to
the needle-worked toile, and also of the bride work. But, notwithstanding
the marvelous results attained in machine-made lace, they are the triumphs
of mechanism which cannot displace the superiority, and charm, and rarity,
of the finest hand-made work. In the latter the personal equation, the
skill and the loving, workmanlike fidelity of the individual toiler to his
task impart a quality which dead mechanism can neither create nor
supersede. Machine-made lace may be predominantly the lace of commerce, but
hand-made lace is the natural expression and embodiment of a delicate and
difficult art, and thus it will ever remain.

INSERTION.--A kind of lace, embroidery or other trimming used to insert in
a plain fabric for ornamental purposes. It is made with the edges on both
sides alike, and often a plain portion of the material outside the work, so
that it may be sewn on one side to the garment for which it is intended and
to the plain part of the lace or border on the other.

{47}

[Illustration: Imitation Point d'Alencon.]

{48} IRISH.--A term denoting a variety of laces made in Ireland, of which
the two most individual and best-known kinds are the net embroideries of
Limerick and the applique and cut cambric work of Carrick-ma-cross. Other
varieties, which are imitations of foreign laces, are Irish point,
resembling Brussels lace; black and white Maltese; silver, black and white
blondes. The Limerick embroideries, for they cannot be strictly called
lace, are an imitation of Indian tambour work, and consist of fine
embroidery in chain-stitches upon a Nottingham net. Carrick-ma-cross, or
Irish guipure, is a kind of so-called Irish point lace, made at the town of
that name, but which is really nothing more than a species of embroidery,
from which part of the cloth is cut away, leaving a guipure ground. It is
not a very durable lace. The most popular patterns are the rose and the
shamrock. Irish crochet is an imitation of the needle-point laces of Spain
and Venice; that is to say, it resembles these laces in general effect.
There is also a needle-point lace made of rather coarse thread, and used
exclusively in Ireland and England. The manufacture of laces in Ireland is
carried on by the cottagers, by the nuns in the convents, and in several
industrial schools founded for that purpose. It has only become a popular
industry within the last twenty-five years, as the costumes of the people
in earlier times did not require lace ornamentation, and there was a
widespread and deep-rooted aversion to the adoption of English fashions in
clothing so long as certain sumptuary laws were unrepealed.

Afterward, under slightly more liberal conditions, English fashions were
gradually adopted, and with them came the demand for a cheap Irish lace, as
the foreign laces were too expensive. Not until 1743 was there any official
attempt to encourage the industry, but in that year the Royal Dublin
Society established prizes for excellence in lacemaking. This attempt
lasted until 1774. In 1829 a school was opened in Limerick for instruction
in the now celebrated lace or embroidery first made in that town; but in
the famine years of 1846-48 more effectual measures were taken to spread a
knowledge of the art, and several schools {49} were opened in different
parts of the country. The Irish have never made a lace that can in any
sense be called national, but great skill has been developed in the
imitations of the foreign fabrics, and the Irish name has been so closely
associated with some of them that they are popularly considered a native
Irish product. The exhibition of Irish laces at the Mansion House in London
in 1883 added materially to the reputation of these fabrics.

IRISH TRIMMING.--A plain-patterned, woven lace, formerly used in
ornamenting muslin underwear, pillow slips and the like.

JESUIT.--A modern needle-point lace, made in Ireland, and so called on
account of the tradition as to the introduction of its manufacture after
the famine of 1846.

KNOTTED.--A term applied to the old Punto a Groppo, of Italian manufacture
originally, and consisting of a fringe or border made of knotted threads.
It is commonly called Knotting in all English-speaking countries. The
modern Macrame is made like the knotted laces.

LILLE.--A lace made at Lille, in France, noted for its clear and light
single reseau ground, which is sometimes ornamented with points d'esprit.
It is a lace of simple design, consisting of a thick run thread, enclosing
cloth-stitch for thick parts, and plaitings for open parts. The old Lille
lace is always made with a stiff and formal pattern, with a thick, straight
edge, and with a square instead of the usual round dots worked over the
ground. Lille was distinguished as a lacemaking city as far back as 1582,
and from that year until 1848 the industry was successful, but since the
latter year there has been a steady decline, as more remunerative
occupations have gradually drawn away the younger workers from lacemaking.
The Lille pattern was similar to that of the laces made at Arras and
Mirecourt, in France, and in Bedfordshire and Buckinghamshire, in England,
but none of the latter could rival the famous single reseau ground. {50}

LIMERICK.--(See Irish Lace.)

LUXEUIL.--A term applied to several varieties of hand-made lace produced at
Luxeuil, France. They are stout, heavy laces, mostly made with the use of
braid, and are much used for curtains and draperies.

MACRAME.--A word of Arabic derivation, signifying a fringe for trimming,
whether cotton, thread or silk, and now used to designate an ornamental
cotton trimming, sometimes called a lace, made by leaving a long fringe of
coarse thread, and interweaving the threads so as to make patterns
geometrical in form. It is useful in decorating light upholstery. Macrame
cord is made of fine, close-twisted cotton thread, prepared especially for
the manufacture of Macrame trimming, and also for coarse netting of various
kinds. The foundation of all Macrame lace or trimming is knots, made by
tying short ends of thread either in horizontal or perpendicular lines, and
interweaving the knots so as to form a geometrical design, as above
mentioned, and sometimes raised, sometimes flat. This necessitates the
forming of simple patterns. This lace is really a revival of the old
Italian knotted points, which were much used three centuries ago in Spain
and Italy for ecclesiastical garments. It appears in some of the paintings
of the early masters, notably Paul Veronese. The art has been taught during
all the nineteenth century in the schools and convents along the Riviera.
It is developed in great perfection at Chiavari, and also at Genoa.
Specimens of elaborate workmanship were in the Paris Exhibition of 1867.

MACKLIN.--Another name for Mechlin lace.

MALINE.--A name sometimes applied to Mechlin lace, especially to the
varieties whose ground is distinguished by a diamond-shaped mesh.

{51}

[Illustration: Real Cluny.]

[Illustration: Real Bruges.]

{52} MALTESE.--A heavy but attractive pillow lace, whose patterns, of
arabesque or geometric design, are formed of plaiting or cloth-stitch, and
are united with a purled bar ground. It is made both in white silk and
thread, and also in black Barcelona silk. There is also a cotton
machine-made variety, used chiefly in trimming muslin underwear. The
history of Maltese lace is interesting from the fact that the kind
originally made in that island by the natives, which was a coarse variety
of Mechlin or Valenciennes, of an arabesque pattern, was in 1833 superseded
by the manufacture of the white and black silk guipures now so widely known
as Maltese lace. This improvement was due to Lady Hamilton Chichester, who
brought laceworkers over from Genoa to teach their craft in the island.
Some of the patterns from that time showed the influence of the Genoese
instruction. Maltese lace is made not only in Malta, but in Auvergne and
Lepuy in France; in Buckinghamshire and Bedfordshire, in England, and also
in the Irish lace schools. Ceylon and Madras lace also resembles Maltese.
Formerly shawls and veils of much beauty and value were made of this lace,
but the manufacture is now confined chiefly to narrow trimmings.

MECHLIN.--A pillow lace originally made at Mechlin, Belgium, and whose
special characteristics are the narrow, flat thread, band or cord, which
outlines the pattern, and the net ground of hexagonal mesh. Sometimes the
mesh is circular. The net ground is made of two threads twisted twice on
four sides and four threads plaited three times on the two other sides. In
this it differs from Brussels lace, whose plait is longer and whose mesh is
larger. The lace is made in one piece upon the pillow, the ground being
formed with the pattern. The very finest thread is used, and a high degree
of skill is necessary, so that the resulting fabric is very costly. It is a
filmy, beautiful and highly transparent lace, and preserves for a very long
time its distinguishing peculiarity of a shiny thread or band surrounding
the outlines of the sprigs and dots of the design. The earliest Mechlin
designs were very like those of Brussels lace, though not so original and
graceful; but in this respect later Mechlin laces showed marked
improvement. The fundamental difference between the two, however, was that
Mechlin was worked in one piece upon the pillow, while the Brussels pattern
was first made by itself, and the reseau or net ground was afterward worked
in around it. The manufacture of Mechlin has long been on the decline, the
French Revolution seriously injuring the industry; and when the trade was
revived and encouraged under Napoleon, the exquisite patterns of former
times had been partly forgotten or were too expensive for popular demand.
At the time of its highest popularity it was called the Queen of Laces,
sharing that title with the finest Alencon point. Mechlin sometimes had an
ornamental net ground called Fond du Neige, and also a ground of
six-pointed Fond Champ, but these kinds were rare. It has always been a
very great favorite with the English, and appears in most of their family
collections of laces. There was a fine collection of this lace at the Paris
Exhibition of 1867 from Turnhout, Belgium, as well as from other lace
manufacturing centers. {53}

[Illustration: Imitation Mechlin.]

[Illustration: Imitation Torchon.]

{54}

MEDICI.--A name for a variety of modern torchon lace, whose distinguishing
peculiarity is the insertion effect, the lace being very like an ordinary
insertion, with the exception of having one edge finished with scallops.
The Medici design is also characterized by plain, close-woven work, the
close work alternating in equal amount with the openwork, the contrast
between them heightening the effect.

MELANGE.--A heavy, black silk lace, distinguished by its mingling of
Spanish patterns with ordinary Chantilly effects. The edge is usually plain
and straight, but is sometimes ornamented with a fine silk fringe.

MIGNONETTE.--A light pillow lace, with an open ground resembling tulle,
made in narrow strips. It was one of the earliest of pillow laces, and
flourished greatly during the sixteenth, seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries. It was made of Lille thread, and the chief places of its
manufacture were Arras, Lille and Paris, in France, and in Switzerland.
{55}

MIRECOURT.--A lace made of detached sprigs upon a net made at the same time
with the pattern. In the seventeenth century it was a French guipure lace
of more delicate texture and varied design than other guipures. Mirecourt,
in the Department of the Vosges, and its environs, were the center of the
industry. The manufacture was begun at an early date, and for centuries
only hempen thread was used, the result being a coarse guipure; but during
the early part of the seventeenth century a finer lace of more delicate
pattern was produced, and it began to be exported in considerable
quantities. Before the union of Lorraine with France, in 1766, there was
less than 800 laceworkers in Mirecourt, but in 1869 the number had
increased to 25,000. During the last century the French demand for this
lace increased far beyond the foreign demand, and it became desirable to
produce a greater variety of pattern. This was done with great success by
imitating the best designs. Another recent improvement at Mirecourt is the
making of application flowers, and though these are not yet as finished as
the Brussels sprigs, they bid fair to supply the French market, so as to
make it to that extent independent of Belgium. The lace made at Mirecourt
is mostly white. The work is similar in process and equal in quality to
that of Lille and Arras.

NANDUTI.--A lace made by the natives of Paraguay, Ecuador and Peru, South
America, from the soft, brilliant fiber of the agave plant. It is made in
silk or thread by a needle on a cardboard pattern. In Peru and Ecuador it
is also needle-made in the form of small squares and united together.

NEEDLE-POINT.--Real lace of any kind worked with a needle, on a parchment
pattern, and not with bobbins or on a pillow. The distinction between
needle-point and bobbin-made, or pillow lace, is also illustrated by the
solid part of the pattern, and also the ground of the former. In
needle-point the solid parts are invariably made of rows of {56} buttonhole
stitches, sometimes closely worked and sometimes with small open spaces
left in the patterns. The "brides" in needle-point consist of one or two
threads fastened across from one part of the pattern to another, and then
closely buttonholed over; it will be found, also, that true needle-point is
made with only one kind of stitch, the looped or buttonhole stitch already
mentioned, and that this is constant amid all varieties of design in this
kind of lace. Pillow lace, on the contrary, has a "toile" made of threads
crossing each other more or less at right angles; its "brides" consist of
twisted or plaited threads, and the "picots" are simple loops, while the
network ground of pillow lace is of far greater variety than that of
needle-point. In all kinds of pillow lace the net groundwork is made by
twisting and plaiting the threads, sometimes in twos and sometimes in
fours. Briefly speaking, the fundamental difference between needle-point
and pillow lace is that the former is made with looped stitches throughout,
while the latter is made with twisted or plaited threads, which last is
really weaving, though it is done with bobbins and the hand instead of with
the loom.

ORIENTAL.--A lace made on the embroidering machine, which by combined
needle and shuttle action produces either simple or complex designs upon
netting. The action of the Schiffli machine somewhat resembles that of a
sewing-machine, and the product is more properly called embroidery than
lace. The openwork effects are produced either by the action of chemicals
upon the foundation material, or by the use of the scissors. The threadwork
results from the combined action of the shuttle and needles. St. Gall,
Switzerland, and Plauen, Saxony, are the chief manufacturing centers for
these laces, which include trimming and border laces, curtains, bed sets,
shams, and the like. In the broad historical sense, Oriental laces and
embroideries refer to the products of the East, especially to the Chinese,
Indian, Japanese, Persian and Turkish. All these were remarkable for the
labor expended upon them, their great cost, and the originality and
boldness of idea and coloring which marked their design. {57}

[Illustration: Real Renaissance.]

[Illustration: Machine Valenciennes.]

{58}

OYAH.--A guipure lace or openwork embroidery, made by means of a hook in a
fashion similar to crochet. The pattern is often elaborate, and in silks of
many colors, representing flowers, foliage, etc. It is sometimes in relief.

PARCHMENT.--Lace in whose manufacture parchment has been used, whether in
the pattern for the worker's guidance, or for stiffening the fabric, as in
Cartisane lace. In old accounts of laces, the term was often applied to
those made on the pillow to distinguish them from needle-point laces, and
it was derived from the pattern on which pillow laces were worked.

{59}

[Illustration: Imitation Point de Venise Combined with Point Gaze.]

{60}

PASSEMENT.--A term applied to the oldest class of pillow laces, at a time
when they were of comparatively simple construction, being little more than
open braids and gimps. This designation was in use until the middle of the
seventeenth century. The word is now applied to a decorative edging or
trimming, especially a gimp or braid. It is an old French word, and in the
country of its origin included in its meaning both lace and embroideries.
It has an interesting literary association, having figured, under the
slightly altered form of "passemens," in a satirical poem published at
Paris in 1661. The poem, which is entitled "La Revolte des Passemens," is
dedicated to Mademoiselle de la Trousse, a cousin of Madame de Sevigne, and
was probably composed by one of her literary friends. It is a protest
against a sumptuary law passed in the previous year to check the lavish
expenditure on laces imported from Venice and Italy, and is interesting as
an account of the best laces of that day, among which are "Pointes de
Genes, de Raguse, de Venise, d'Angleterre et de Flanders," as well as the
"Gueuse" of humbler pretensions. The various laces are supposed to revolt
against the law excluding them from France, and especially from their place
in the exalted society of the court. Mesdames les Broderies--

 "Le Poincts, Dentelles, Passemens,
  Qui par une vaine despence,
  Ruinoient aujourd'hui la France"--

call an indignation meeting. One of them hotly demands what punishment
shall be meted out to the court for such treatment--

 "Dites moi je vous prie,
  Poincts, dentelles ou broderies,
  Qu'aurons nous donc fait a la cour," etc.

Various laces speak their mind freely in reply, but most of them are gloomy
as to the future, while a few try to take a philosophical view of the
situation, and resign themselves to an humbler though still useful fate. An
English lace, "une Grande Dentelle d'Angleterre" answers

 "Cet infortune sans seconde
  Elle fait bien renoncer au monde
    *    *    *    *    *    *
  Pour ne plus tourner a tout vent
  Comme d'entrer dans un Convent."

The laces of Flanders are not so submissive as that, being too vain and
ambitious for renunciation of the world and life in a convent, and their
angry opposition starts a little tempest of debate, fierce resolution
alternating with despair. A black lace in hopeless mood hires herself out
with a game merchant, for nets to catch snipe and woodcock. An old gold
lace, in grandmotherly style, tries to comfort the younger ones, by
reminding them of the vanity of the world. She knows all about it--she, who
has dwelt in king's houses. The Flanders laces cry out that rather than
give in they would sooner be sewn to the bottom of a petticoat. Some of the
younger ones declare they must still have amusement, having had so much,
and rather than renounce the world they will {61} seek refuge in the
masquerade shops. The point laces, with the exception of Aurillac, then
resolve to go each to his own country, when suddenly the humble but plucky
Gueuse lace, the lace of the common people, arrives from a village near
Paris and encourages the others to fight it out.

The next morning they all assemble and agree upon a plan of campaign, but
before doing so take stock of their qualifications and prospects. Poinct
d'Alencon has a good opinion of herself; a Flanders lace says she made two
campaigns under the king, as a cravat; another had been in the wars under
the great Marshal Turenne; another was torn at the siege of Dunkirk; and
all had done something worth notice. "What have we to fear?" asked an
English lace. A Poinct de Genes, of rather flabby character, advises the
English lace to go slow. Finally open war is declared, and the laces all
assemble at the fair of St. Germain to be reviewed by General Luxe. The
muster roll is called by Colonel Sotte Depense, and the various regiments
and battalions march forth to victory or death. But they got neither, for
at the first approach of the royal artillery they take to their heels, are
captured and condemned to various punishments.

The gold and silver laces, the leaders of the rebellion, are sentenced to
the fate of Jeanne D'Arc, to be burned alive; the points are condemned to
be made into tinder for the sole use of the King's Musketeers; others are
to be made into cordage or sent to the galleys. But pardon is obtained
through the good offices of cunning little Cupid--"Le petit dieu plein de
finesse," and the rebels are restored to their former position.

The poem illustrates the policy of most European governments at that time,
a policy of excluding foreign manufactures of all kinds; and in the case of
laces, the fear of encouraging wasteful habits among the rich, who offered
a tempting opportunity for royal extortion, was too {62} useful a pretence
to be passed by. But all these efforts were fruitless to discourage the
growth of lacemaking. The passion for beauty in personal adornment would
not down. The engravings of Abraham Bosse, which portray the dress and
manners of that time, humorously depict the despair of the fashionable lady
over the prospect of giving up her laces. She is represented as attired in
plain hemmed linen cuffs, collar and cap of Puritanical severity, bemoaning
her sad fate, in heartbreaking strains, as she sorrowfully packs away her
rich lace-trimmed costumes. Her sadness was not unduly prolonged. Colbert,
the great French statesman, saw that laces would be smuggled if they were
legally prohibited, that the rich would have them at any cost, so he
encouraged foreign lacemakers to come to France, and the manufacture was
thus promoted.

PILLOW.--Lace made on the pillow or cushion, both pattern and mesh being
formed by hand. See Needle-point lace.

PLAITED.--A pillow lace of simple geometrical design, often made of strong
and stiff strands, such as gold thread or fine braid. The pattern, besides
being geometrical in design, is open, and has no grounds. For ordinary
purposes tinsel is used instead of real gold, and the lace is then employed
for theatrical purposes. Historically considered, the plaited laces made of
gold, silver or silk thread, took the place of the Italian knotted laces of
the sixteenth century. Those produced at Genoa and in Spain were the best,
and they are made in Spain to-day, chiefly for church uses. The thread
plaited laces of the seventeenth century were used to trim ruffs and
falling collars, but went out of fashion when flowing wigs came in, as the
latter hid the collar and would not allow ruffs to be worn. At the present
time plaited laces have become known under the name of Maltese and Cluny,
and are made at Auvergne, in France, Malta, and in the English counties of
Bedfordshire and Buckinghamshire. {63}

[Illustration: Real Maltese.]

[Illustration: Real Guipure.]

{64}

PLAUEN.--A name applied to any kind of lace made at Plauen, Saxony, or
elsewhere, upon the embroidering machine, such as Oriental, tulle and
chiffon lace, Point de Venise, Point d'Irlande. Plauen led in the
manufacture of this kind of lace, having begun it in 1881, from which year
dates the importance of that city as a lace market. The manufacture was
gradually developed. Only the tulle variety of embroidery lace was produced
until 1886. The distinguishing feature of this was that the hollow effects
were made by opening the tulle meshes by hand. Then, in 1886, an openwork
process was invented by which chemical action was employed to remove a
woolen or silk foundation from the cotton-embroidered pattern, or a cotton
foundation from a silk embroidery that had been worked on it. This made it
possible to form the pattern by the embroidery machine in the same way as
in the case of ordinary embroidery. The wool foundation, which is necessary
to be removed in finishing the goods, is dissolved by the action of certain
chemicals without changing the cotton or silk pattern. In this way the most
difficult and complicated patterns of real lace can be imitated. Plauen
manufacturers have for the most part taken the old and costly hand-made
laces of former times for their models; but they have also originated new
and tasteful designs from time to time.

POINT APPLIQUE.--Point lace whose design is separate from the net ground,
to which it is afterward applied. At the present time the net ground is
usually machine-made. The word "point," however, in this connection, is of
variable application, sometimes signifying Point Applique, and sometimes
denoting lace, whether pillow or needle-point; that is, worked in sprays
and laid upon a machine-net ground. (See Application lace.)

POINT D'ALENCON.--See Alencon.

POINT D'ANGLETERRE.--See English Point.

POINT DE GAZE.--A very fine, gauze-like lace, made entirely with the {65}
needle and grounded with its own net. Point de Gaze is the result of an
attempt of the Brussels lacemakers to return to the best early traditions
of needle-point. Point de Gaze differs, however, from the finest old
needle-point in certain respects, partly necessitated by modern taste in
design, and partly from the need of great economy in labor costs. For
example, the execution is much more open and delicate than in the early
lace of this description, but this very delicacy and slightness are made
use of to produce a very elegant effect. Part of the toile, or substance of
the pattern, is made in close and part in open stitch, giving an appearance
of shading, and the open parts are very tastefully ornamented with dots.
The result does not in all respects equal the softness and richness of the
early lace, but if Point de Gaze seems thin and loose in comparison, and if
the patterns seem less ideally beautiful, nevertheless the later work has a
unique lightness and delicacy to which the earlier lace did not attain. It
certainly is the most etherial and delicately beautiful of all point laces.
Its forms are not emphasized by a raised outline of buttonhole stitching,
as in Point d'Alencon and Point d'Argentan, but are simply outlined by a
thread.

POINT DE GENE.--A name at present applied to a species of lace made both in
cotton and silk at St. Gall and Plauen, and recognized by its regular net
ground and large, open patterns in heavy stitchwork. It is a popular
trimming for women's dresses. Point de Gene, or Genes, was originally one
of the laces made at the city of Genoa and in the surrounding country
during the seventeenth century, both the pillow and needle laces made there
being deservedly famous. Gold and silver thread and gold wire were used in
the manufacture of the earliest needle-point laces at Genoa, and the gold
wire was drawn out in exact imitation of the early Greek method. One of the
best Genoese laces resembles the early Greek points in patterns. There was
also a guipure lace, made from aloe fiber, as well as the knotted lace now
{66} known as Macrame. The last named is the only lace at present made in
Genoa, and along the seacoast.

POINT D'ESPRIT.--A term applied to a small oval or square figure, peculiar
to certain varieties of early guipure, and ordinarily composed of three
short lengths of parchment or cord, placed side by side and covered with
thread. These oval or square figures were most commonly arranged in the
form of rosettes. At present the term Point d'Esprit denotes a much smaller
solid or mat surface, used to diversify the net ground of some laces. It is
in the form of small squares that set at close and regular intervals. In
standard histories of lace the term is also used as synonymous with
embroidered tulle, made in Brittany, Denmark and around Genoa.

POINT D'IRLANDE.--A coarse, machine-made imitation of real Venetian point
lace. It is popular for dress trimmings, and is manufactured in a great
variety of widths in cotton and silk. It has no net ground, the patterns
being united by brides.

POINT DE MILAN.--A guipure lace with a small mesh ground, and the pattern
distinguished by striking scroll designs. The flowers in the pattern of
hand-made Point de Milan are flat, and have the appearance of having been
wrought in close-woven linen. Milan point was made at the city of that name
in 1493. Gold and silver thread were first used, but the Milan points were
finer than these, and fully equal to the best Spanish and Venetian points.

POINT DE PARIS.--Originally a narrow pillow lace, resembling Brussels. The
term is now generally applied to a machine-made cotton lace of simple
pattern and inferior quality. In its making a design whose figures, such as
flowers and leaves, are outlined with a heavy thread, is worked upon a net
ground. Point de Paris is distinguished by the net, which is hexagonal in
form.

POINT DE VENISE.--See Venice Point. {67}

[Illustration: Imitation Irish Crochet.]

{68}

POINT.--Same as Needle-point lace, made wholly by hand, with the needle and
a single thread.

POT.--Lace whose pattern is distinguished by the figure of a vase or deep
dish, and sometimes by that of a basket containing flowers. It is the
best-known lace made at Antwerp, and was formerly in common use in that
city for decorating women's caps. The vase and basket figures vary much in
size and design. Some have considered this pattern to be a survival from an
earlier design, including the figure of the Virgin and the Annunciation,
but this is not certain.

POWDERED.--Lace whose ground is strewn with small, separate ornaments, such
as flowers, sprigs, or squares, like Point d'Esprit. The term is applied
also to whitened lace.

RENAISSANCE.--A modern point lace, whose patterns are made of narrow braid,
and united by bars or filling of different kinds. It is generally
ornamented with circular figures and scroll-work, stitched in place by
needle and thread, the intervening spaces or groundwork, being composed of
a variety of fancy openwork. Irish Renaissance, Luxeuil and Battenberg are
the other names for this lace.

ROSE POINT.--See Venice Point.

SAXONY.--Fine drawnwork embroidered with the needle, in much demand in the
eighteenth century. At the present time the term is somewhat vague,
denoting many kinds of laces made in Saxony, especially in imitation of old
Brussels lace. Though the latter is the best that is made, a coarse guipure
lace, known as Etervelle, and plaited lace has the greatest sale.

SEAMING.--A narrow openwork insertion, gimp or braiding, with parallel
sides, used for joining two breadths of linen, instead of sewing them
directly the one to the other. The name is given to a similar lace used for
edgings, as in the trimming of pillow-cases and sheets. {69} During the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries this lace was very popular, though the
name "seaming" was then applied to any kind of lace used for a particular
purpose--namely, to insert in the linen or other fabric wherever a seam
appeared, and often where no seam was really necessary. The lace first used
for this purpose was cut-work; then Hollie point became fashionable, and
afterward the custom grew to be so common that cheaper laces were employed.
There is still in existence a sheet decorated with cut-work that once
belonged to Shakespeare.

SILVER.--A passement or guipure wholly or in large part composed of silver
wire, or of warp threads of silk, or silk and cotton combined, wound with a
thin, flat ribbon of silver. See Gold lace.

SPANISH.--A general term applies to the following four different kinds of
lace: (a) Needle-point lace, brought from Spanish convents after their
dissolution, though the art of making it is thought by some to have been
learned in Flanders. (b) Cut and drawnwork made in Spanish convents, of
patterns usually confined to simple sprigs and flowers. (c) A modern black
silk lace with large flower patterns. (d) A modern needle-made fabric, the
pattern usually in large squares. The machine-made black and white silk
laces, with their flower patterns, are from Lyons and Calais, France. Much
could be said about the uncertain application of the term "Spanish" in
regard to certain kinds of lace. It has often been inaccurately used. For
instance, "Spanish Point" and "Point d'Espagne" have been misapplied to
Italian laces, in the same way that "Point d'Angleterre" has been
misapplied to Brussels lace. In the four kinds of Spanish lace above
enumerated, it is noticeable that some are of Flemish origin. A lace known
for certain to be of Spanish origin is a coarse pillow guipure made in
white thread and also of gold and silver. It is a loosely made fabric
consisting of three cordonnets, the center one being the coarsest, united
by finer threads running in and out across them, and with brides to join
{70} the parts of the pattern and keep them in shape. It is well known that
large quantities of lace that have the characteristics of raised Venetian
Point were used in Spain, both for court dresses and church purposes, such
as the ornamentation of vestments and altars. During the invasion of
Napoleon the churches and monasteries were pillaged and the laces contained
therein were scattered abroad and sold as being of Spanish origin, though
many of them were not.

The graceful Spanish headdress, the mantilla, has been chiefly made in the
province of Catalonia, out of black and white Blondes, but it is inferior
to a similar lace of French manufacture. The most celebrated of the Spanish
laces are the gold and silver fabrics, known as Point d'Espagne, the Blonde
laces and Spanish or Rose point. The first-named is a very old lace, was
known in Spain as early as the middle of the fifteenth century, and is made
with gold and silver threads, upon which a pattern is embroidered in
colored silk. The Blondes, which have been already mentioned, have thick
though graceful patterns upon a light net ground. Rose point is wholly made
with the needle and is very like Venetian point, being considered, in fact,
as a variety of the latter. The close resemblance is accounted for by the
fact that this kind of lace was made by the inmates of religious houses,
which were transferred from one country to another at the will of their
superior and carried with them the secret of a difficult art. The Rose
points, some of which are not raised, are formed with a pattern-worked net
in buttonhole stitches, the parts of the pattern being joined together by
brides. The raised Rose points are recognized by their thick cordonnet or
outlining of the pattern.

TAMBOUR.--Lace made with needle embroidery upon a machine-made net,
generally black or white Nottingham. It is chiefly made in Ireland and
commonly included among the Limerick laces.

{71}

[Illustration: Leavers's Lace Machine.]

{72} TAPE.--A lace made with the needle, except that a tape or narrow strip
of linen is wrought into the work and is the distinguishing feature of the
pattern. These plain or ornamented tapes or braids, arranged so as to form
the pattern, have always been peculiar to this kind of lace. The patterns
are connected together with either bride or net grounds. The earliest were
made with a bride ground and simple cloth stitch, but gradually very
elaborate designs were wrought as part of the braid-like patterns and
united by open-meshed grounds. In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries
the braid and tape laces included the large majority of coarse pillow laces
made in Flanders, Spain and Italy.

THREAD.--Lace made from linen thread as distinguished from silk and cotton
laces. Black thread is a misnomer for Chantilly.

TORCHON.--A coarse pillow lace made of strong, soft and loosely twisted
thread. In Europe it is known also as "Beggars'" lace, and the old French
Gueuse lace was similar to Torchon. The patterns generally are very simple
and formed with a loose stout thread and the ground is coarse net. Torchon
is now also machine made.

VALENCIENNES.--A solid and durable pillow lace having the same kind of
thread throughout for both ground and pattern. Both the pattern and ground
are wrought together by the same hand, and as this demands much skill in
the manipulation of a great many threads and bobbins, the price of
Valenciennes is very high. The mesh of the ground is usually square or
diamond shaped, very open and of great regularity. It is a flat lace,
worked in one piece, and no different kind of thread is introduced to
outline the pattern or to be wrought into any part of the fabric. This
affords a ready means of distinguishing the hand-made variety of this lace.
The Valenciennes now made is not so beautiful in design and construction as
the fabric of an earlier date, especially in the latter part of the
eighteenth century. It is usually of narrower width and is easier to learn
how to make.

Valenciennes was first made at the town of that name, which, {73} though
originally Flemish, was transferred to France by treaty; and the
manufacture at this town was carried on under conditions which assured the
superiority of the lace produced there. The difference between the
Valenciennes product and that of other towns could be detected by the
softer "feel" in the former case, because the moist climate of Valenciennes
gave a smoother action to the bobbins when used in manufacture; and it is
interesting to note that the lace was made in underground rooms. These
peculiarities earned for lace made in that town the name of Vraie
Valenciennes, and it brought a higher price than the Valenciennes of the
surrounding villages. The thread was spun from the finest flax. To buy a
yard of a flounce or a pair of broad ruffles was a serious matter for the
purchaser unless he was wealthy. The labor cost was high even in those days
of low wages; from 300 to 1,200 bobbins were required in a piece of fine
work. The history of the changes in Valenciennes patterns is, to some
extent, a history of deterioration in elegance of design. The first
patterns were exquisitely beautiful, the designs often being wrought in
grounds that were varied in several ways even in one piece. The designs
afterward became simpler, and octagon and hexagon meshes came to take the
place of the close grounds of earlier manufacture. Since 1780 the lighter
and less expensive laces of Lille, Brussels and Arras have partly ousted
the more beautiful, costly and durable product of Valenciennes, while
changes in modern dress have stopped the demand for some articles which
were formerly among the fashionable mainstays of the industry; for example,
men's ruffles.

The French Revolution practically destroyed lacemaking at Valenciennes, and
the industry was transferred to Belgium. The lace produced there was,
however, given the name of False Valenciennes. Alost, Bruges, Ypres, Ghent,
Menin and Courtrai became centers of the manufacture, and the lace made in
each town had a distinguishing {74} feature in the ground. For example, the
Ghent ground is square meshed, the bobbin being twisted two and one-half
times. At Ypres, the ground is square meshed, but the bobbins are twisted
four times. In Courtrai and Menin, the bobbins are twisted three and a half
times, and in Bruges three times. As an illustration of the fact that the
making of old Valenciennes is a lost art, it is interesting to note that
the last important piece of work executed within that town was a headdress
presented by the town to the Duchesse de Nemoms on her marriage in 1840.
The headdress was made by old women, the few real Valenciennes laceworkers
then surviving, with the praiseworthy and patriotic object of showing the
perfection of the product of former days. There are several machine-made
varieties of Valenciennes. English Valenciennes is chiefly made at
Nottingham; it is also called Platt and Normandy Valenciennes. It is an
imitation of the early hand-made lace, to the extent of having a similar
diamond-meshed ground. Its pattern is without relief, and the threads of
which it is made are no heavier than the ground. French Valenciennes is
made mostly at Calais. Its pattern is usually outlined by a stouter thread
than that forming the ground, and it has a finer finish and softer "feel"
than the English Valenciennes; in fact, it is an excellent imitation of the
real. Italian Valenciennes is a narrow, fine-threaded lace, used for
trimming fine underwear.

{75}

[Illustration: Schiffli or Power Embroidering Machine.]

{76} VENICE POINT.--A needle-point lace made at Venice during the first
half of the seventeenth century. It is somewhat difficult to apply the name
exclusively to any one of the several varieties of Venetian point made at
that time; but Venetian Raised point, whose pattern is of large,
beautifully designed flowers in decided relief and united by brides or
bars, is commonly called Venetian point. Other names applied to this kind
of lace are Rose point, Venetian Flat point, Carnival lace, Cardinal's
point, Pope's point, and Point d'Espagne. These names simply register the
various changes of style and manufacture in the history of this lace. With
the exception of Point d'Espagne, which has a less valid claim to be called
Venetian point than the others, the various names given serve roughly to
suggest the distinction between three separate stages in point of style and
date of the fabric known broadly as "Punto tagliato a foliani," or Venetian
point. They are generally given as follows: (1) Venetian Raised point, or
Gros Point de Venise, under which is included Rose point; (2) Venetian Flat
point, or Point Plat de Venise, with its later variety, known as Coraline
point; (3) Grounded Venetian point, or Point de Venise a Reseau, which
includes Burano point, so called from the island near Venice, where it was
made. With regard to Raised point, it is worth noting, in addition to the
characteristics already referred to, that the flower design is of a freedom
and continuity that make the pattern so filling that there is very little
space left for the ground, the bridework merely serving to hold the pattern
strongly together. The cordonnet, or outlining thread, is unusually
prominent, and the raised part is no less remarkable for its boldness in
design than for its delicate workmanship. An Italian poet has described
this work as "sculptured in relief." In Raised point the skill of the
laceworker was informed by the instinct for beauty in such a degree as to
produce one of the highest types of the art. Rose point resembles Raised
point in all essential features, the only difference being that the designs
are smaller and the ornamentation more abundant. The pattern is less
filling and the connecting brides more prominent.

Flat Venetian point is marked by an absence of the prominent raised work,
the designs are more attenuated, and the brides are altogether more
prominent than in the Raised point. Coraline point is a variety of Flat
point, which must be considered a deterioration in design on account of its
ill-connected and irregular pattern, which was originally supposed to
imitate a branch of coral. There is no raised work, the ground meshes are
ill-arranged and ill-shaped, and on the whole this {77} lace marks the
decadence of an art formerly almost perfect. It is more like an imitation
of a free growth of plants, the tangled growth of a state of nature, as
compared with the order and beauty of art. The grounded point, the last
stage of development of Venetian lace, began to be made to supply the
markets of France after the fine old Venetian point had been excluded by
protective laws. The Venetian lacemakers then adopted the reseau or net
ground made at Alencon. The ground is composed of double twisted threads,
and has a rounder mesh than Alencon, and there is no outlining cordonnet.
In this variety of Venetian point, which was produced during the latter
half of the eighteenth century, the pattern is not so well arranged as in
others, and there is a redundancy of ornamentation. The manufacture of
Venetian point is now almost extinct. The machine-made variety, produced on
the Schiffli embroidery frame, is now made at Plauen and St. Gall. (See
Plauen lace.)

YAK.--A stout, coarse pillow lace, made from the fine wool of the Yak. The
patterns are of simple, geometrical design, connected with plaited guipure
bars that form part of the pattern, being made out of the same threads at
the same time. The term is also applied to a machine-made worsted lace,
produced in black, white and colors. It is used as a trimming for
undergarments, shawls and petticoats.

YPRES.--A pillow lace resembling Valenciennes, but sometimes with bolder
designs and rather large lozenge or square mesh in the ground; also a type
of Valenciennes.

       *       *       *       *       *


Corrections made to printed original:

Page 2 in "though it was also regarded as the insignia":--"though", printed
as "thought" in original.

Page 34 in "transferred to Calvados":--"transferred", printed as
"trasferred" in original.

Page 39 in "the leaves of the aloe":--"aloe", printed as "alol" in
original.

Page 65 in "raised outline of buttonhole stitching":--"raised", printed as
"raise" in original.

Page 75 in caption "Schiffli or Power Embroidering
Machine":--"Embroidering", printed as "Embroldering" in original.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Lace, Its Origin and History, by 
Samuel L. Goldenberg

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LACE, ITS ORIGIN AND HISTORY ***

***** This file should be named 38973.txt or 38973.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/3/8/9/7/38973/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Keith Edkins and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
