The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Ontario Archives, by Alexander Fraser

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Ontario Archives
       Scope of its Operations

Author: Alexander Fraser

Release Date: August 6, 2011 [EBook #36992]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ONTARIO ARCHIVES ***




Produced by James Wright and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Canada Team at http://www.pgdpcanada.net (This
book was created from images of public domain material
made available by the University of Toronto Libraries
(http://link.library.utoronto.ca/booksonline/).)









               THE ONTARIO ARCHIVES: SCOPE OF ITS
                           OPERATIONS

        (Paper read at the twenty-seventh annual meeting of
           the American Historical Association, held at
               Buffalo, N. Y., December 27-30, 1911)

                               BY

                        ALEXANDER FRASER

             LL. D., LITT. D., F. S. A., SCOT. EDIN.


Reprinted from the Annual Report of the American Historical Association
                     for 1911, pages 353-362

                           WASHINGTON
                              1913




                      THE ONTARIO ARCHIVES.

           By ALEXANDER FRASER, Provincial Archivist.


The line of demarcation between the Canadian or Dominion archives and
the Ontario or other provincial archives is somewhat similar to that
between the Federal and State archives in the United States. It consists
with the scope of the jurisdiction of the Dominion or major
commonwealth, and the narrower or minor jurisdiction of the Province.
This constitutes a clearly defined boundary within which both work
without conflict or overlapping of interests. Our public charter is an
imperial statute entitled the British North America act, and to-day,
when there are nine fully constituted, autonomous Provinces within the
Dominion of Canada, it is interesting to recall that when the British
North America act became law in 1867 the subtitle set forth that it was
"An act for the union of Canada, Nova Scotia, and New Brunswick, and the
government thereof; and for purposes connected therewith."

This act provides for the government of Ontario a lieutenant-governor,
who represents the Crown; an executive council of ministers of state and
a legislature composed of duly elected representatives of the people. To
this body the act secures exclusive legislative powers in Ontario and
Quebec, in the matter of Crown lands, forests and mines; education, from
the public common school to the university; municipal government,
institutions and laws; incorporation of chartered companies--commercial,
financial, professional, or social; solemnization of marriage, involving
family history, vital statistics, etc.; property and civil rights;
administration of justice, embracing both civil and criminal
jurisdiction; agriculture and immigration, under which municipal,
industrial, and agricultural statistics are collected, tabulated, and
published; the founding and maintenance of provincial institutions such
as hospitals, asylums, reformatories, prisons, and institutions for the
instruction of the deaf and dumb and the blind; offices for the local
registration of deeds, titles to land; the licensing of shops, taverns,
hotels, auctioneers, etc.; the erection of local public works; the
authorization and regulation of transportation not interprovincial.

In short the Provincial Government gets close to the life of the people
and touches its business and social sides intimately. As at present
constituted the ministry comprises the departments of: The attorney
general, dealing with the administration of law; the provincial
secretary, controlling registration, and the public institutions; the
provincial treasurer, dealing with the public accounts; agriculture;
lands, forests, and mines; public works; and education. The prime
minister is statutorily president of the council and head of the
ministry. Besides these and exercising semi-ministerial or departmental
functions are two commissions, the hydro-electric commission and the
Government railway commission. These, with the legislature itself, are
the departments of government in which our archives originate.

Archives we have defined as the records, the business papers, of the
province having a permanent value. All archives need not be of
historical value in the narrow sense. Public documents may have a
business or record value apart from history, yet it would be hard to say
that any given document might not be found useful in some way in
connection with history. The main value of a document is as an evidence
of truth. Every document does not contain truth, yet even such a
document may, in effect, be a fact in history, and training and
experience lead to a reasonably true interpretation.

The Ontario Bureau of Archives, organized in 1903, is equally related
and attached to all the Government departments, and receives all papers
and documents of record value or of historical interest, not in current
use, from all branches of the public service. When possible, these
documents are classified, calendared, and indexed.

The archives originating in the legislative assembly are: The Scroll of
Parliament--the documents known by that title being the notes and
memoranda made by the clerk, of the routine proceedings of the house
during its sessions; the original signatures of the members of the
legislative assembly subscribed to the oath of allegiance when "sworn
in" as members of the assembly, the signatures being written on
parchment; copies of the statutes in the form in which they have been
assented to and signed by His Honor the Lieutenant Governor. These
copies are printed on good paper, and after having been assented to
become the originals of the statutes in force; and the original copy
pertaining to the consolidated statutes.

Among the assembly archives are the manuscripts of all sessional papers
not printed (a sessional paper is a return called for by order of the
house, whether printed or not, and the reports of departments and all
branches of the public service presented to the house); the originals of
all petitions presented to the house (these are not printed); the
originals of bills in the form in which they are presented to the house;
and copies of bills amended during their passage through the house. The
original copy of sessional papers which are printed is returned with the
proof sheets to the department or officer issuing the same.

Naturally next in importance to the records of the legislature are those
of the executive council or Government. All matters requiring executive
action are brought before the council upon the recommendation or report
of the minister having the subject matter in charge. The recommendation
or report is addressed to His Honor the Lieutenant Governor in Council.
The reports of the committee of council are signed by the prime minister
as president, are counter-signed by the clerk and submitted to the
lieutenant governor for approval, after which the document becomes and
is known as an order of His Honor the Lieutenant Governor in Council.
Effect is given to orders in council affecting the general public by the
promulgation of them in the Ontario Gazette; otherwise by the
transmission of certified copies to the departments or persons
concerned. The original orders (together with the recommendations,
reports, and papers upon which they are based), after being registered
in special journals, become most valuable records and much in request.

Through the department of the attorney general access is obtained to the
voluminous records, rich in personal history and jurisprudence, arising
from the administration of justice, in its vast ramifications and
details, reaching from the policeman and justice of the peace to the
high courts and court of appeal; from the homely minutes of the quarter
sessions of early times, to the record of the recent cause celebre which
influenced the legislation of the country, or settled questions of
constitutional import.

With the office of the provincial secretary the provincial archivist
necessarily has very close relations. The office of the secretary is the
medium of communication, through the lieutenant governor, between the
provincial, dominion, and imperial governments. All such correspondence
is registered and copies of the dispatches are kept. All commissions
bearing the great seal of the Province are issued by the secretary, and
are registered in his office, as are also all appointments made by his
Honor the Lieutenant Governor in Council requiring the issuance of a
commission. Charters of incorporation, licenses for extra-provincial
companies doing business in Ontario, and marriage licenses are issued
here under the direction of the secretary; here also are made records of
all Crown land patents (the earliest record being 1795), the records of
all mining leases and deeds and leases relating to the public lands,
etc. In the secretary's office are kept the vital statistics of the
Province. From the organization of the Province in 1792 until 1849
marriages were recorded in the parish and congregational registers kept
by clergymen, in the minute books of the quarter sessions of the peace,
and in the memorandum books of justices of the peace. In addition to
this, fairly complete records of births were made in the baptismal
registers, and of deaths in the journals of clergymen, who recorded the
deaths of parishioners for congregational purposes. Many of these old
books, however, have been either lost or destroyed, or their disposition
is not known. In 1849 the municipalities were enabled to make provision
by by-law for the registration of births, marriages, and deaths, and
advantage was taken of that statute to a very considerable extent. From
the passing of the law of 1849 until 1874 all records of marriages in
the Province were returned to the city and county registrars, who became
their official custodians. In 1869 the office of the registrar general
was established and compulsory registration of births, marriages, and
deaths introduced. Until 1874 the returns were still sent to the county
and city registrars, but since 1874 they have been sent direct to the
registrar general's office. The work of transcribing these returns and
preserving them in proper form has been proceeding for years; and the
documents, books, and statistical papers of the office, which are in
safe keeping, form an invaluable collection of archives.

In addition to the original vouchers of the public accounts, the
treasury department contains the papers of the succession duty office,
including affidavits made by the applicants on all applications for
letters probate or letters of administration in the Province showing the
value, as at the date of the death of a deceased person, of such
person's estate, with a general statement of the distribution thereof;
including copies of wills, affidavits of value, bonds, and other
documents which in particular cases have been furnished in order that
the amount of succession duty payable, in cases liable to payment, might
be ascertained. These documents are not generally accessible to the
public, as they relate to the private concerns not only of deceased but
of living persons, but they are a valuable addition to the surrogate
courts' records which are a mine of genealogical information.

The great staple enterprises of Ontario are agriculture, industrial
production, lumbering, mining, and in general, trade and commerce. Of
these agriculture is the greatest, and the records of its growth and
development have a special value to the student of economics. The
statistical branch, formed in 1882, issues annual reports dealing with
agricultural and municipal interests--assessment figures, population,
areas assessed, taxes imposed, annual receipts and expenditures, assets
and liabilities, chattel mortgages, proving of value to municipal
debenture holders and the public generally.

Of all our departments, the bureau of archives has drawn most largely on
the documentary treasures of the department of Crown lands. The material
of historical interest here is exceedingly varied and valuable,
embracing the records of the surveys of the Province; the original maps,
field notes, and diaries relating to the survey of all the townships
dating back to 1784, and reports of all the explorations made within the
limits of the Province since that date; reports showing the planning
out and surveys of the old military roads, such as Dundas Street, Yonge
Street, the Penetanguishene and Kingston Roads, and the papers in
connection with the surveys of the Talbot Road, the Huron Road, the
Garafraxa Road, the Toronto and Sydenham Road (Owen Sound). There's much
valuable information in the notes concerning the pioneer settlements.
This branch also contains plans of all the old Indian reserves of the
Province and reports indicating the early condition of the Indian
settlements on these reserves; also of the ordnance surveys in the
Province pertaining to land grants to old settlers; plans of the
military reserves and plans showing the location and groundwork of the
early forts. Besides these there are the original surveys of all the
lands acquired by the Canada company and of those granted to King's
College. A collection of much importance already transferred to the
archives vaults is that embracing the diaries or journals of David
Thompson, the astronomer royal, covering a period of 66 years, from 1784
to 1850, and making about 50 volumes. Thompson's famous map showing the
continent from the Atlantic to the Pacific, and from a little south of
the Great Lakes to Hudson Bay, is carefully preserved in the collection.
Thompson's journals and map have furnished interesting material to
students of our early history. They have been used by Mr. Coues in his
work entitled "New light on the Great North-West," and have been found
useful in connection with editions of Henry's and Thompson's journals.
Competent authorities regard Thompson's work as most valuable to the
State, especially in the fixing of boundary lines; but of little less
importance are the field notes and diaries of many of the early
surveyors, not merely for topographical reasons but on account of the
detailed information given. In a separate vault are many other valuable
and interesting documents, including the United Empire Loyalists' lists,
the records of land grants to immigrants, to discharged soldiers, and
the militia grants of warrants to discharged troops, to United Empire
Loyalists, volumes of land board certificates, returns of locations
compiled for the quartermaster general, fiat and warrant books, domesday
books, containing original entries of every lot that is patented, and
extending to 26 large volumes, descriptions and terms or references on
which patents and leases are issued, patents for Crown lands, mining
lands, free grant lands, and mining leases. There are also a series of
maps of the townships of the Province as surveyed, which have the names
of the original holders and settlers entered on each lot or block of
land. These maps show among other things the grant made to King's
College, and the lands allotted to the Canada Land Co. The historical
value of these records is inestimable, for without them the settlement
of the Province could not be traced or shown.

The most interesting archives emanating from the public-works department
are the records of the early colonization roads--arteries of settlement
and trade routes and the title deeds, plans and specifications,
contracts, maps, and documents relating to Crown property, buildings,
and institutions, a finely conditioned collection.

I have thus, at considerable length, described the field in which the
archivist of Ontario labors and out of which he is gradually building up
his storehouse of archives. The main purpose of the bureau is that of a
record office of State papers, primarily for their proper preservation
and for the greater convenience of the public service. This is in the
nature of things. A central office, in which papers from all departments
of the Government are lodged after they have passed out of current use,
examined, classified, and filed by a staff familiar with their contents,
need only be brought into use to become indispensably serviceable in the
carrying on of public business; but in addition, the archivist, knowing
the contents of the documents in his custody, is able to direct and help
in a manner that can not otherwise be done, that portion of the public
interested in the information contained in the Government archives.

Notwithstanding the completeness and compactness of the field I have
briefly sketched as a logical and correct one for the purposes of a
State record office, it is nevertheless equally obvious that Government
records alone do not nor can embrace all the archives properly so called
of a State or Province. When, therefore, I was asked, eight years ago,
to organize a bureau of archives for Ontario, I laid out a much wider
plan than that I have referred to, with, however, the State record
office always as the central idea. The bureau is therefore double
barreled; it draws from the pigeonholes of the departments, and it
collects outside material that may throw light on the settlement and
development of the Province of Ontario, the source of which is often far
afield. For instance, the Province of Quebec (including Ontario), up to
1774 included all to the south and west as far as St. Louis and the
Mississippi, and of course, what became in 1791 Upper Canada. The
British regime is touched by the French and the French by the Indian.

In carrying out this plan the bureau aims at the collection of documents
having, in the widest sense, a bearing upon the political or social
history of Ontario, and upon its agricultural, industrial, commercial,
and financial development; the collection of municipal, school, and
church records; the collection and preservation of pamphlets, maps,
charts, manuscripts, papers, regimental muster rolls, etc., bearing on
its past or present history; the collection and preservation of facts
illustrative of the early settlements, pioneer experience, customs, mode
of living, prices, wages, boundaries, areas cultivated, homes, etc.; the
collection and preservation of correspondence, letters from and to
settlers, documents in private hands pertaining to public and social
affairs, etc., reports of local events and historic incidents in the
family or public life; the rescuing from oblivion of the memory of the
pioneer settlers, the obtaining and preserving narratives of their early
exploits, and of the part they took in opening up the country for
occupation; and the bureau cooperates with the historical societies of
Ontario and societies kindred to them, helping to consolidate and
classify their work, and as far as practicable to direct local effort on
given lines.

Within this scope the following plan of work has been adopted: To divide
the history of Ontario until the confederation of the Provinces in 1867
into its political periods, arranging the material secured in
chronological order, and giving each period a series of reports. Thus
the work has been carried on in all the divisions simultaneously, and
when sufficient material has accumulated in any one of them, it has been
utilized by the publication of documents without undue delay. From
confederation onward, the larger quantity of material to be dealt with,
and the probable absence of sweeping constitutional changes to mark
eras, suggested a chronological rather than a political basis of
division. The periods are:

     1. To the close of the French regime, or the period of French
            discovery, 1763.

     2. To the organization of the Province of Upper Canada, 1791.

     3. To the legislative union of Upper and Lower Canada, 1841.

     4. To confederation, 1867.

     5. To the end of the nineteenth century, 1900.

In each of these divisions there is much work to do. Each has its own
distinctive features, and there is abundance of minor incident.

Material of special interest to Ontario bearing on the French regime is
contained in the "Correspondence Generale," in the papers of the
"Collection de Moreau St. Mery," which have been transcribed from the
Paris archives for the Canadian archives, most of which has never been
published in printed form. There is also valuable Ontario material in
the "Haldimand Collection of papers," the "Bouquet Papers," and the
Colonial Office records bearing on this period. It is intended to
collect and publish these papers, accompanied by an adequate
translation, when not written in English, and adding extracts in
chronological order from the publications of Perrot, La Potherie, La
Harpe, Charlevoix, De Kalm, the Jesuit Relations, papers by Margry, and
a portion of the "Memoire pour Messire Francois Bigot," which contains
what seems to be an excellent summary of the commerce and condition of
all the western trading posts at the time of the conquest. Other sources
of material for publication have also been considered in connection with
this early period.

Aboriginal or Indian history presents many interesting features to us,
and some attention has been given to the subject, including an inquiry
as to the original savage occupants of Ontario, their origin,
migrations, traffic, and intercourse; their language, topographical
nomenclature, folklore, and literature; the origin and development of
their clan, tribal, and national organization; the history and results
of European contact; their present condition, capabilities, and
tendencies.

This period of Ontario history, that of the French regime, will be our
heroic age, as "distance lends enchantment to the view." Here will be
found the adventurous coureurs de bois, many of the great routes and
trading posts, the headquarters of which in later times, was Fort
William, on Thunder Bay. Here the Huron and Iroquois met in deadly
conflict; here also the French missionaries of the Cross endured untold
sufferings with ecstatic heroism, and receiving the martyr's crown left
a record of Christian zeal and fortitude not surpassed, if at all
equaled, in the history of the world. Events which stirred the
imagination and fascinated the finely poised mind of a Parkman will yet
furnish the material for Canada's great, unwritten epic poem.

The Ontario bureau of archives has made a beginning in this field by
publishing a volume on the "Identification of the Huron Village Sites,"
where those missionaries labored and fell, prepared by the venerable and
scholarly archivist of St. Mary's College, Montreal, the Rev. Father
Jones, S. J., a contribution, I believe, of undoubted value. It may be
taken as significant of our attitude that a work of such erudite
research has been treated as a public document and issued free to the
people at the expense of the Government. It will soon be followed by the
writings of Father Potier, a work of far-reaching importance and
interest, which is in process of preparation for the press. The three
volumes of manuscript have been photographed page by page and a
zincograph facsimile of the original will be placed before scholars, a
work the casual announcement of which has already whetted the appetites
of not a few antiquarians.

Leaving this interesting period for the second I have mentioned, we
reach the coming to Ontario of the United Empire Loyalists. These form
the basis of our population and still give color to our political
thought and form and fashion to our institutions. In this period we have
published two volumes, one of about 1,500 pages, being the manuscript of
evidence laid before a royal commission reporting on the claims for
compensation for losses suffered by the United Empire Loyalists, a
document now out of print and much sought for. The other volume consists
of the minutes of the land board of the western district of Ontario,
bordering on Lake Erie and the Detroit River, containing particulars
of grants of land before 1792, schedules, regulations, description lists
of grantees, and surveys, and a mass of data connected with Indian
rights and the settlement of land generally. It has been of value in
land-title lawsuits, etc., and extends to more than 500 pages.

Combining this period with the succeeding one, we have collected the
proclamations by the Crown from 1763 to 1840 and issued them in a
volume, the necessity of which has been felt, as may be understood when
it is stated that no such collection had ever been made before, though
these proclamations are of public use in an endless variety of business.

Under our third division the narrower political history of our Province
begins, the introduction of constitutional government--the work of the
legislature, some of whose early records are lost, the outbreak of the
War of 1812, the progress of settlement, and the development of
municipal and commercial institutions, the restiveness leading to the
rising of 1837, and the concessions made to responsible government. Here
a great deal of archival work has been already accomplished. The
journals of the proceedings of the legislature of Upper Canada from 1792
to 1818, so far as we have been able to find them, have been published
and the series will be issued to the year 1824, from which year printed
copies are in existence. The journals of the legislative council
concurrent with those of the legislative assembly down to 1816 have also
been published, and one volume in each series, now in the press, will
complete the work. These journals are simply indispensable, being the
original evidence of all our legislation. Our constitutional development
and the history of our legislature can not be studied or understood
without them. I may be pardoned should I refer particularly to one of
many interesting questions dealt with in the closing years of the
eighteenth century as shown in these journals. The legislative assembly,
following the rule of the Imperial House of Commons, claimed the power
of the purse, and objected to their supply bill being amended by the
legislative council or upper house. A deadlock ensued; neither side
would budge from its position; a conference of both houses was held and
the assembly won on the understanding that the question would be
referred to the law officers of the Crown in Britain for future
guidance. This was accordingly done and the right claimed by the
assembly or lower house was conceded to it. Thus was solved amicably for
Canada at the small hamlet of Newark, on the banks of the Niagara, a
constitutional principle which recently shook the United Kingdom and
produced a serious and radical constitutional crisis, in which once more
the Commons vindicated their supremacy in questions of national
finance.

The records of the first Court of Common Pleas for Upper Canada, with
valuable annotations and historical notes, are being prepared for the
press.

In this division we have in hand among other things the preparation of a
domesday book for the Province. Our plan, which has made substantial
progress, is to cover all our settlement of Crown lands from 1783 to
1900 by townships, giving each grantee a description, and, for the
purpose of reference, a number. Succeeding volumes will furnish memoirs,
notes, and statistical data of a special character bearing on the
grantees and on their settlements. In this connection we are collecting
and rapidly accumulating local material which will be drawn upon for
this work. This I consider one of the biggest undertakings planned by
the bureau, which occupy much time to bring it to completion, but when
completed will be a work of reference of permanent use to our historical
investigators.

We are also collecting papers and documents pertaining to the political
history of Ontario that ought to be preserved in permanent form, which
will be issued in a series of four consecutive volumes. These have been
planned on lines that will bring their usefulness directly to the
growing class of students of our provincial history.

Lately a genealogical branch has been included in our program and steps
are being taken to obtain by legislation a change of official forms so
as to help in the collecting of data. The work will be conducted on the
basis of the county unit, with correspondents engaged under the
direction of the bureau.

While effort has been directed on these lines, I have paid more
attention to the collecting of much neglected material throughout the
Province--in the hands of private individuals, public bodies, or local
officials, rather than to the exact and adequate classification and
indexing of outside material as it is being received. The Province has
been so long entirely neglected that when I undertook to organize the
department I decided that the most valuable service I could render to
the public was to acquire, to collect, and safely preserve whatever
material I could find, believing the day would soon come when the value
of such material would be fully realized and the necessary office
assistance provided to enable me to make the accumulated archives
conveniently accessible to the public.




Transcriber's Notes:-

P. 355  "the Lieutanant Governor in Council." changed to "the Lieutenant
         Governor in Council."

Original spelling and punctuation retained.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Ontario Archives, by Alexander Fraser

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ONTARIO ARCHIVES ***

***** This file should be named 36992.txt or 36992.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/3/6/9/9/36992/

Produced by James Wright and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Canada Team at http://www.pgdpcanada.net (This
book was created from images of public domain material
made available by the University of Toronto Libraries
(http://link.library.utoronto.ca/booksonline/).)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
