The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Khaki Boys Over the Top, by Gordon Bates

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Khaki Boys Over the Top
       Doing and Daring for Uncle Sam

Author: Gordon Bates

Release Date: July 20, 2004 [EBook #12957]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE KHAKI BOYS OVER THE TOP ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Jeni Warnken and PG Distributed
Proofreaders





  THE KHAKI BOYS
  OVER THE TOP
  OR
  _Doing and Daring for Uncle Sam_

  By

  CAPT. GORDON BATES

  Author of "The Khaki Boys at Camp Sterling"
  "The Khaki Boys on the Way," "The
  Khaki Boys at the Front," etc.

  _ILLUSTRATED_



  1919



THE KHAKI BOYS SERIES

By CAPT. GORDON BATES

  THE KHAKI BOYS AT CAMP STERLING
    or Training for the Big Fight in France

  THE KHAKI BOYS ON THE WAY
    or Doing Their Bit on Land and Sea

  THE KHAKI BOYS AT THE FRONT
    or Shoulder to Shoulder in the Trenches

  THE KHAKI BOYS OVER THE TOP
    or Doing and Daring for Uncle Sam

  THE KHAKI BOYS FIGHTING TO WIN
    or Smashing the German Lines

CUPPLES & LEON COMPANY, New York



       *       *       *       *       *




THE KHAKI BOYS OVER THE TOP

CONTENTS

  CHAPTER                                     PAGE

      I     BLOWN BACK                            1

     II     TO THE RESCUE                        11

    III     SENT TO THE REAR                     19

     IV     A DOUBLE LOSS                        28

      V     WHAT'S TO BE DONE                    38

     VI     GOOD NEWS                            44

    VII     UNDER FIERCE FIRE                    52

   VIII     THE OLD MILL                         61

     IX     TRAPPED                              70

      X     FALLING WALLS                        78

     XI     A STRANGE RESCUE                     88

    XII     MUCH WONDERING                       98

   XIII     A PERILOUS JOURNEY                  105

    XIV     THE SENTRY                          113

     XV     IN THE BATTLE AGAIN                 122

    XVI     HELD UP                             133

   XVII     A BATTLE OF THE AIR                 139

  XVIII     CAPTURED                            146

    XIX     THREE PRISONERS                     156

     XX     THE CAPTAIN AGAIN                   163

    XXI     BACK WITH FRIENDS                   176

   XXII     FIERCE FIGHTING                     185

  XXIII     THE LONELY HUT                      192

   XXIV     A GLORIOUS VICTORY                  199




[Illustration: [Transcriber's note: original truncated] 'INTO
THE MIDST OF THE']




THE KHAKI BOYS OVER THE TOP





CHAPTER I

BLOWN BACK


"What's that, Schnitz?"

"What's what!"

"That noise. Sounds like a party coming along the communication
trench!"

The talk was in tense whispers, and the listening was now of the same
tenseness. Two khaki-clad Sammies stood on the alert in the muddy
ditch, dignified by the title, "trench," and tried to pierce the
darkness that was like a pall of black velvet over everything.

"Hear it?" inquired he who had first spoken.

"I somedings hears, too," spoke a guttural voice, with a foreign
accent. "Might not it perhaps be--"

"Cut that talk, Iggy!" sharply commanded the first speaker. "Do you
want the lieutenant dropping in on us!" And Corporal Robert Dalton
cautiously moved nearer his fellow non-com., Sergeant Franz Schnitzel.

"Yes, not so loud," advised Schnitzel, who, in spite of his Teutonic
name, was a thorough American, speaking with no trace of German
accent. "Don't forget that the Boches may have listening parties out
right in front of this trench, even though they may have information
that we're going to rush 'em just before dawn."

"But what is that noise?" went on Bob. "It sounds like the relief
coming, and yet we can't be going to be relieved so near the zero
hour. It's impossible."

"Him one big word is," sighed Iggy, trying to adjust his Polish tongue
to the strange language called English. "But thinks me nothing is like
him in dis war!"

"Nothing is like what?" asked Schnitzel, the talk now being reduced to
whispers on the part of all three.

"Him wot you said--repossible," said the Polish lad.

"Hush!" quickly exclaimed Bob, or Dal, as he was variously called by
his comrades. "There _is_ some one coming along the trench. If it's
the Boches--"

This was enough to cause all three to grip their rifles more tightly.
The sound of advancing footsteps, cautious as they were, was now more
audible. Then came a whispered, but sharp:

"Halt! Who goes there!"

"Our lieut's on the job!" commented Bob.

Tensely the three who stood shoulder to shoulder in the darkness of
the foremost trench, waiting, listened for the answer. It came, also
in a whisper, but it carried to their ears.

"Sergeant Blaise and Sergeant Barlow, ordered to report here to you,
sir."

"Oh golly! It's Blazes und Ruddy!" gasped Iggy.

"Cheese it!" cautioned Dal, for the Polish lad, in his enthusiasm,
had spoken above a whisper, and even slight sounds carried far on this
dark, still night.

"Advance, Sergeant Blaise to be recognized," came the order from the
sentry, evidently acting on advice from the lieutenant in command of
this part of the American trench.

There was a period of silent waiting on the part of the three
who stood so close together, and then they heard their immediate
commanding officer say:

"Pass on. You'll find your friends just beyond here."

A moment later the two newcomers were grasping hands in the dark with
the three waiting ones.

"The five Brothers are united again," said Roger Barlow in a low
voice.

"Sooner than I expected," commented Jimmy Blaise. "Now we can go over
the top together."

"Over the top, may we all go together, in the wind and the rain or
in damp, foggy weather," was Bob Dalton's contribution. He sometimes
"perpetrated verse," as he dubbed it--a reminder of his cub reporter
days.

"But say, Jimmy, how did you manage to get here?" asked Franz.

"Walked," was Jimmy Blaise's laconic answer. "They haven't had to
carry me on a stretcher--at least not lately."

"Oh, you know what I mean," said Franz. "I mean, did you ask to be
transferred from your station to this trench?"

"No, and that's the funny part of it," said Roger Barlow. "You know
after we wrote our letters to-night--or, rather last night, for it's
past twelve now--Blazes and I went back to our station."

"Yes, and we came here to wait for the zero signal," interpolated Dal.

"Well, we hadn't been out in our trench very long before we were
relieved, and told to report to Lieutenant Dobson here," resumed
Jimmy. "And when we remembered that this was where you three were
stationed, say, maybe we weren't glad!"

"We are of a gladness also much!" whispered the Polish lad, and there
was rather a pathetic note in his voice. "It is a goodness gracious to
have you here!"

"Say, you can do more things to the English language than the Boches
can on an air raid," chuckled Jimmy.

"Oh, well, it is of a much hardness to speak," sighed Iggy.

"Well, there's no fault to be found with your _fighting_, that's
sure!" declared Roger. "Put her there, old pal!" and he clasped hands
with his foreign "Brother."

"How's everything here?" asked Jimmy, when the five had taken such
easy positions as were available in the narrow trench.

"We're all ready for the zero hour," replied Bob. "Everybody's on
their tiptoes. I wish it was over--I mean here. This waiting is worse
than fighting."

"It sure is," commented Franz. "But it won't be long now."

"What time do you make it?" asked Bob.

"Must be quite some after three," said Jimmy in a low voice. "It was
nearly three when we got our orders to come here."

Roger took out a tiny pocket flash lamp, and, placing one finger over
the bulb so that no rays would escape, held the dim glow over his
wrist-watch.

"Quarter to four," he announced.

"Fifteen minutes more," sighed Dal.

"They'll seem like fifteen years, though, Bob," commented Jimmy.

A reaction, in the shape of silence, came upon the Khaki Boys--"five
Brothers" as they called themselves, for they had become that since
their participation in the World War. Tensely and quietly they waited
in the trench for the hands of time to move to the hour of four. This
was the "zero" period, when in a wave of men and steel, or lead and
high explosives, the Americans would go over the top, in an endeavor
to dislodge the Germans from a strong position.

Only a few hours before, after each had written a letter home, the
missives having been sent back of the lines to be posted, the five
lads had solemnly shaken hands at parting. The two sergeants--James
Blaise and Roger Barlow--went to a distant part of the intricate
trench system, while the two corporals, Robert Dalton and Ignace
Pulinski and Sergeant Franz Schnitzel were together in a ditch near
the middle of the barbed wire entanglements. And now, by a strange
turn of fate, they were all together again, waiting for the final word
that might send then all into eternity, or cause them to live horribly
misshapen.

Something of this seemed to be felt by the five Khaki Boys as they
stood in the mud and darkness waiting. For it had rained and the
trench was slimy on the bottom in spite of the "duck boards."

"I wonder where we'll be this time to-morrow," mused Bob in a low
voice.

"Oh, cut out the 'sob sister' stuff!" said Jimmy, a bit sharply.
"Isn't it gloomy enough here without that?"

They talked in the lowest whispers, and there were the murmurs of
whispers on either side of them, for their comrades up and down the
trenches felt the same strain, and relieved it by talking cautiously.

"I think we'll all be together again," said Roger, trying to speak
cheerfully. "Somehow I've got a feeling that we'll come out of this
all right."

"Me, I hat a dream," slowly remarked Iggy. "Of my dream I now know
only one cling--und dot is my face was all bloody!"

"Oh, for the love of Mike! Don't croak!" exclaimed Jimmy.

"Silence down there!" came a sharp command. Jimmy had spoken too
loudly, and the listening lieutenant had heard him.

Slowly the minutes dragged. Once again Roger carefully looked at his
watch.

"What time is it?" whispered Franz.

"Five minutes of."

"Great Scott! Is it only ten minutes since you looked before! It seems
like a lifetime. Whew! I'm all in a sweat!"

And yet the night was cool.

It was now as silent as death in the trench, and all about it. Earlier
in the night there had been distant shelling, but this had ceased some
time since.

Roger, unable to stand the strain longer, was about to flash his
little pocket electric torch again when suddenly the stillness of the
night was broken by a loud, shrill whistle.

"The signal!" cried Jimmy.

"The zero hour at last!" shrilled Roger in his tense excitement.

"Over the top!" yelled Bob. "Over the top!"

And just as the first streaks of the gray light of dawn began to
pierce the blackness, the five Brothers, and their comrades up and
down the trenches, leaped from their places of waiting with savage
yells, and started for the German lines.

"I am glad! I am glad!" sang Iggy. "Now I can of the fight have a
piece!"

He and Franz sprang out of the trench together. Side by side they
raced over the rough ground, through the gaps cut in the barbed wire.
A little in advance were Jimmy, Roger and Bob.

And now the big guns began their chorus. With boom and roar, roar and
boom they sang their anthem of death. The rattle of rifles came in as
a response, and all this was punctured by fiendish yells.

Then, too, from the German lines, came the answering song of the big
guns. Though the attack had taken them by surprise, they were not slow
in responding. With all that we think of the Boches we must give them
credit for being savage, if unfair, fighters. They seldom declined a
challenge, at least on the front lines.

"Come on! Come on!" yelled Jimmy.

"Up and at 'em! Up and at 'em!" snapped Roger.

"Wow! This is going to be some fight!" exulted Bob.

It was fast growing light, and the disappearing darkness was further
illuminated by the flashes from hundreds of guns. Lines of khaki-clad
Sammies were pouring from the American trenches now, in a mad rush for
the Hun positions.

"Well, we're together yet, anyhow," mused Jimmy, as, looking back, he
saw Bob, the Polish lad, and Franz coming on with a rush.

"Yes, we're together--yet," added Roger. They both had been firing
madly at the distant gray lines of German soldiers in front of them.
They had to yell into each other's ears to be heard above the din.

Suddenly the very earth seemed to drop away from under their feet.
They felt the shock of rushing air. A big, high-explosive shell had
dropped near them.

"That's bad!" shouted Jimmy, as the concussion died away. He looked
behind him and saw, with horror, Iggy, the Polish Brother, literally
being blown back through the air. Whether this was the effect of the
big shell that had exploded, or whether it was caused by a smaller one
going off a moment later, Jimmy could not tell. But he saw Iggy
hurtling through the air, and the face of the Polish lad was covered
with blood, as he himself had said it had been in his dream.




CHAPTER II

TO THE RESCUE


"Go on! Don't stop! Slam at 'em!"

It was the sharp command of the lieutenant in immediate charge of the
detachment including Jimmy Blaise and his comrades.

"Forward! Forward!" was yelled on every side.

The din continued--increased. It seemed as though there could be
nothing left whole on earth again; in all that riot of noise and
blood--as though everything must be rent to pieces.

"Are you all right!" cried Jimmy in the ear of Roger.

"Yes. Not scratched yet. How about--"

A loud explosion to one side cut off his words in a blast, but Jimmy
knew what his chum wanted to say. When there was a momentary lull he
answered:

"Iggy's gone!"

"Gone?"

"Yes. I had a glimpse of him being blown back--his face was all
red--bloody."

Roger could not repress a shudder. But there was no time for any
thoughts like these. He had a glimpse of Bob Dalton and Franz
Schnitzel stumbling toward him and Jimmy. Then came a sharp command:

"Down! Down on your faces! Everyone! They're turning loose the
machine-guns!"

The four remaining Khaki Boys fell flat, and only just in time. Over
them swept a veritable hail of machine gun bullets.

"Dig in! Dig in!" commanded the lieutenant.

Frantically with their picks and shovels the Sammies began to make
shallow ditches in which to lie. The upraised earth would offer some
protection against the forward sweeping lead, though not very much
against shrapnel which explodes in the air above and is driven
downward.

And as the four Brothers were making shallow trenches they wondered,
with sorrow in their hearts, if there was a chance that Iggy had been
left alive.

"If we stay here long enough, I'll see if I can't get permission to go
back and find out," mused Jimmy, as he frantically scraped the earth
into a sort of long mound in front of his head. They were under a hot
fire now. The American advance had been momentarily checked.

And while there is this period in the fighting may I not take
advantage of it to make my new readers acquainted with the main
characters of this story, and also tell something of the previous books
in this series?

The initial volume is called "The Khaki Boys at Camp Sterling," and in
the pages of that you meet, for the first time, Jimmy, Roger, Bob and
Iggy. To introduce them more formally I will say that Jimmy's correct
name was James Sumner Blaise, and that he was the son of wealthy
parents. He was about nineteen years old, and this was the average age
of his comrades.

Roger Barlow was an orphan, and had been working in a munition factory
when he decided to enlist. Robert Dalton had been a "cub" reporter
on a newspaper, and, like Roger, was an orphan. Though Ignace was no
orphan, possessing both father and mother and a number of sisters and
brothers, his home life was not happy, and he was really glad to join
the army.

These four lads soon became "bunkies" at Camp Sterling, where they
had their training. Later they took into their friendship one Franz
Schnitzel, who, though possessed of a German name, was, nevertheless,
a loyal "United Stateser," as Iggy called it. Franz had a hard time,
at first, convincing people of his loyalty, and once he was accused of
a black crime, but later he was proved innocent.

After having been trained at the camp, and cementing their friendship
in many ways, the "five Brothers" as they called themselves, were sent
across. In the second book of the series, "The Khaki Boys On the
Way," we find our youthful heroes sailing for France after a series of
adventures, one a startling one, at Camp Marvin. This adventure had to
do with the blowing up of a bridge, and Jimmy Blaise had a fight with
a spy--a fight that came near being Jimmy's last.

In this second book will also be found an account of the trip of the
Khaki Boys to the coast, where they boarded a transport for France. If
they expected to get across safely, as many thousands did, they were
disappointed, for they were attacked by a U-Boat. Many on board the
transport _Columbia_ perished, but the five Brothers were saved, and,
after a time spent in a rest camp in England, they crossed the channel
to France.

The third volume, called "The Khaki Boys at the Front," tells in
detail some of their exciting experiences. The quintette were given
leave to go from their camp to Paris, and in that beautiful city they
met some other friends, the Twinkle Twins, otherwise John and Gerald
Twinkleton, who had joined the aviation branch of the service. This
was natural, since their cousin, Emile Voissard, was one of the most
daring of the airmen, meriting the name "Flying Terror of France."

In that book, too, you may read of how Franz Schnitzel, by his
knowledge of the German tongue, was able to give advance notice of a
raid he overheard the Huns planning. The raid was a failure from the
German standpoint, but during it some of our Khaki Boys were wounded.

Adventure followed adventure, but in one "grand" one, as a Frenchman
would call it, Jimmy, on guard when Voissard's aeroplane was on the
ground, temporarily disabled, stood off an attack of Germans and among
others he killed Adolph von Kreitzen, known as the "tiger man." On his
head the French government had set a price of five thousand francs, or
about a thousand dollars, and of course Jimmy won this.

So now, in the opening of this present story, we find our five Khaki
Boys still together after many strenuous happenings. They had been
wounded but were now recovered and they had fought valiantly.

In the last chapter of the book immediately preceding this, if you
recall, the lads had written letters home--letters which might be
their last, they thought, for they had orders to take their places in
the front line trenches to await the zero hour. Two of the Brothers
had been separated from their chums, but all were reunited as we have
seen.

Then had come the command to go over the top, and there had followed
the fierce rush in the gray dawn of the morning--a rush punctuated by
fire, smoke and death.

"Dig in! Dig in!" commanded the lieutenant in command of the
particular squad of the 509th infantry to which our friends were
attached. "This is only a temporary check. We're laying down a curtain
of fire, and we'll go forward again in a moment!"

He had to yell to be heard above the din, but all near him understood
what he meant. The American gunners were sending over a barrage
fire--a veritable rain of bullets that would keep the Germans
from advancing, and which would also cause them to abandon their
machine-guns. It was the machine-gun fire that was, temporarily,
holding up the advance of Jimmy and his chums.

It did not take the Sammies long, working feverishly as they did, to
raise a protecting mound of earth between them and the Huns. And then,
for some reason or other, the savage fire of the Germans slacked at
the particular section of the line where our heroes were stationed.

"Are you all right, Rodge?" called Jimmy to the chum on his left.

"So far, yes. How about you?"

"Oh, I was nicked in one ear--just a scratch. It's hardly bleeding.
Can you see Bob?"

"Yes, he's got a swell place--in a shell hole, and Franz is with him.
See anything of Iggy?"

"No," answered Jimmy. "I'm afraid he's done for. If I get a chance,
I'm going back to see. Looks as if Fritz had had enough at this
sector."

"Aren't we going forward?" some one called to the lieutenant in
charge. "Come on! Lead us to the Boches!"

"Have to wait for orders," was the grim answer. "We were told to halt
here. Can't go on without orders!"

There were murmurs of disapproval at this, but the discipline was
strict.

"Anybody badly wounded?" asked the lieutenant. "If there is, now's
your chance to get some first-aid treatment. Later you can't,
perhaps."

There were one or two who were suffering badly, and these took
advantage of the lull in the fighting to apply bandages to their
hurts.

"Poor Iggy!" mused Jimmy, and then, as the lieutenant crawled near
him--for no one was standing upright--the sergeant asked:

"May I crawl back, sir, and see what happened to Corporal Pulinski?"

"Did you see anything happen to him?"

"Yes, sir. I saw him blown backward when the big shell exploded, and
he seemed to be falling toward some sort of shell crater. If we're
going to be held here long, I'd like to go to his rescue--to see if
he's still alive."

"Very well," assented the young commanding officer. "Ill take a chance
and let you." He knew of the pact of friendship existing among the
five Brothers. "Take some one with you. But crawl--don't try to walk."

"I won't, sir. May Sergeant Barlow come along?"

"Yes. But come back if we get the order to advance again."

"I will, yes, sir!"

Swinging around on his stomach, and calling to Roger, telling him
of the permission received, Jimmy Blaise started toward the rear to
rescue, if possible, the Polish lad.

"But I'm afraid we'll find him done for," confided Jimmy to Roger.
"The shell must have landed right in front of him. It made a hole as
big as a house."

"Poor Iggy!" murmured Roger.




CHAPTER III

SENT TO THE REAR


Roger Barlow, who was slightly behind his comrade in their queer
progress back toward the shell hole near which the Polish lad had been
seen to fall, observed his fellow sergeant come to a halt.

"What's the matter--hit?" cried Roger anxiously. And this well might
have been the case, since, though there was a lull in the fighting
immediately in front of Company E, there were plenty of stray bullets,
not to mention pieces of shrapnel and bits of high explosive shells,
that might have reached the crawling lad.

"Hit? No, not yet," answered Jimmy. "I'm going to try, if it's safe,
to make a little better progress than this, though. This is too slow.
Poor Iggy may be dead before we get to him."

"Probably is," commented Roger.

"Oh, can the gloomy stuff!" snapped Jimmy. Afterward he admitted that
his nerves were pretty well strained. In fact that was the condition
of all of them. "You're almost as bad as Franz," went on Jimmy.

"Well, I don't want to be too hopeful," returned Roger. "But what are
you going to do, anyhow?"

"This," answered his chum. He drew his rifle up close beside him, took
off his tin hat, stuck it on the end of his bayonet, and cautiously
raised it well above the ground. It received no bullets, as might have
been expected.

"Come on, we can run for it!" cried Jimmy.

"What makes you think so?" asked his chum. "Didn't the lieutenant tell
us to lie on our faces?"

"Yes, but that was before the fighting ceased in front of us. Fritz
is having all he can attend to on either wing of our advance, and,
for the time being we're not being molested. If the Huns were in any
strength directly ahead of us, or to our rear as we are now, that tin
helmet would look like a sieve by this time. It's safe enough to get
up and run for it. And we've got to hustle if we want to save Iggy."

"All right, just as you say!" murmured Roger, as he began to rise.
It was not without a natural feeling of timidity that he cautiously
elevated himself first to his knees and then to his feet. As for
Jimmy, he had impulsively stood upright.

"Come on!" he yelled above the din of battle. "Come on!"

He started on a run over the shell-torn ground, with what remained of
the barbed wire entanglements here and there.

"I'm coming!" answered Roger.

He expected any moment to receive a bullet, or to be utterly blasted
from the earth by some terrible shell explosion. And Jimmy confessed,
later, that he felt the same fear. But these fears did not hold back
the Khaki Boys from continuing on to the rescue of their comrade--if
he was in a condition to be rescued.

"Where's the place?" cried Roger to his chum, when they had covered
several yards in a hasty rush toward the rear.

"Must be somewhere around here," answered Jimmy, looking about
him. That part of No Man's Land where they then were, seemingly was
deserted by all save the dead. If there had been any injured they had
been taken well back behind the lines by stretcher bearers.

For a time Roger and Jimmy feared they might be considered deserters,
coming toward the rear as they were doing, and away from the fighting,
and aside from mere scratches neither of them showing any wounds.
Though if they had been hurt that would have been an excuse for making
a retreat.

But no one observed the two--there was no one to observe them, in
fact. They were some distance from their own trenches, and immediately
back of them--toward the German lines--there had been a division in
the fighting, so that the battle waged on either wing, as it were.

"Look in all the shell holes!" directed Jimmy. "The shell burst right
in front, or to one side of poor Iggy. He was blown into a shell hole,
of that I'm pretty sure."

"There's a hole--a big one, too," said Roger. "But there's no one
in it--only dead!" and he turned away, for some of those dead were
comrades who, the night before, had been in the trenches with him and
his chums.

But the Khaki Boys were hardened to scenes like this now. Too many
times had they seen the dead and dying. There was no time to nurse
one's feelings.

"Come on! Come on!" cried Jimmy feverishly. "We've got to be quick!
Iggy may bleed to death if he's hurt anything like I think he is."

"Yes, and this place may be a regular lead hail storm, soon," added
Roger. "I can't see why our company was held up! Why couldn't we keep
on giving the Huns what they deserve?"

"Orders are orders, my boy, we learned that long ago. And when the
lieut. wouldn't let us go on, there must be some reason for it. I'm
just as anxious to give Fritz his medicine as anyone. Hello, there!
Did you hear that queer noise!"

"Yes. Sounded like a groan. Listen!"

The tide of battle was away from them now, and they were able, above
the distant roar, to hear ordinary sounds, which had not been the case
when the attack started. The sun was well up now, and the day gave
promise of being a fine one--hot, too. And on such a scene the sun
shone! Death and devastation brought on by human beasts!

"There it is again!" cried Roger, "It sure was a groan."

"Somebody around here is alive, at any rate," said Jimmy.

There were a number of terribly mangled bodies near them, and it was
hardly believable that the groan came from any of those poor forms of
what had once been living men.

"Over here!" cried Roger suddenly. "The sound came from down in that
shell hole!"

He pointed to one, on the sides of which was fresh earth, showing that
the explosive had recently fallen.

"There's no one down in that hole," declared Roger, taking a look.

"Yes there is!" asserted Jimmy. "See that shoe sticking out!"

He pointed to what seemed but a mound of dirt and stones in the very
bottom of the shell crater. And Roger observed that the dirt did not
altogether cover a leg and foot. An army shoe was sticking out.

"Come on!" cried Jimmy, and the next moment he was sliding down the
side of the shell hole. Roger followed, and the two began to roll
aside the larger stones that had fallen on the body. The Khaki Boys
leaned their rifles against the side of the crater, and took off their
gas masks, from where they lining ready for use, in order to work more
freely.

"The wind isn't right for a gas attack," murmured Roger, as he
temporarily deprived himself of this necessary protection.

As the boys feverishly worked to uncover the form they heard another
loud groan coming from beneath the dirt.

"It doesn't seem possible anyone can be alive--like this," panted
Roger as he labored at a heavy stone.

"Don't talk--work!" snapped Jimmy. "If he's alive, whoever it is, he
needs help quick."

"Wonder if it's Iggy?" went on Roger.

Jimmy's hands flew as do the legs of a dog when he is digging out a
buried bone, nor was Roger behind his comrade. They labored at that
part of the pile of earth and stones which covered the face and head
of the unfortunate soldier.

"There--he can breathe if he's alive still!" gasped Jimmy as he
straightened up after having lifted aside a board that had fallen over
the face of the Sammie they were trying to rescue. And it was
this board that undoubtedly saved the unfortunate from dying by
suffocation.

For the piece of plank had fallen in such a way, being supported on
either end by resting on two stones on either side of the man's head,
that it kept the dirt and stones away from the face.

And that it was a face which they had uncovered, was not at all
certain to Roger and Jimmy at first. For so covered with blood,
streaks of dirt and powder stains was the countenance that it
resembled nothing human.

"He's alive--whoever he is!" declared Jimmy, for the unfortunate
was observed to breathe--and breathe deeply as the air came in more
abundantly to the parted lips.

Roger began digging in the dirt again, working down to the man's
hands. And when he had brushed aside the dirt and stones he lifted up
a limp wrist. One look at the identification tag chained around it,
and he cried:

"It's Iggy! We've found him all right!"

"Sure enough--it _is_ Iggy!" cried Jimmy, as he, too, looked at the
metal disk.

"Ach! Yes! Water!" faintly moaned the Polish lad. His voice was
a moan, but it was his voice. He opened his eyes, looked almost
uncomprehendingly at his two chums and smiled faintly.

"So, come you haf!" he murmured. "Think I did dat you would!"

His head, which he had raised, sank back limply.

"Here!" cried Jimmy, opening his canteen. "Drink this!"

Poor Iggy did, gratefully enough. Some of the water trickled over his
face, and when Roger wiped it away some of the blood and dirt went
with it.

"Why he isn't hurt much--not up here, anyhow!" cried Jimmy. "I thought
sure his whole head was blown off the way he looked."

"Well, let's get him out of here and look at him afterward," counseled
Roger, and they resumed their work until the Polish lad's body was
all exposed. Then he was lifted out, and in a little while it was
ascertained that he was not seriously injured--at least outwardly. His
arms and legs were whole, and there was no big wound, though he was
terribly scratched and bruised.

"But why stand up can not I!" asked Iggy, for Roger and Jimmy were
supporting him with their arms around him down in the shell hole.

"I guess he means why can't he stand up," translated Roger,
for sometimes their foreign Brother misplaced his English words
considerably.

"Sure! Why can't not I stand?" went on Iggy. "My legs--they is got no
business to 'em. Like paper legs they is!"

Roger and Jimmy looked apprehensively at one another. This loss of
feeling and muscular power in Iggy's legs might indicate that his
spine was injured--that his whole lower body was paralyzed!

"We've got to get him to the rear--to a hospital," said Roger in a low
voice, as the Polish lad's head drooped weakly on his shoulder.

"Yes," assented Jimmy. "But can we carry him?"

"Got to!"

They looked about for some means of getting Iggy to the top of the
shell hole. That would be the most difficult part of the rescue. Then,
to their surprise, the two who had come back to seek their friend,
heard a hail on the rim of the crater above them.

"What's the matter down there?" came the cry. "Do you want help!"

"You said it!" voiced Jimmy, vigorously.

"All right. Wait a minute. We'll be right down!"

It was two stretcher-bearers who had hailed, and, a little later,
Ignace Pulinski was being carried to the rear. He had fainted when
brought to the top of the shell hole.




CHAPTER IV

A DOUBLE LOSS


After waiting a moment on the ground at the top of the shell crater,
to see their comrade being carried to a first-aid dressing station at
the rear, Jimmy and Roger started back to join their two friends who
were still, it was to be hoped, waiting for orders to advance.

"S'pose he's much hurt?" asked Roger, something like a dry sob choking
him as he thought of poor Iggy.

"I'm afraid so--yes," answered Jimmy. "That business of his legs
feeling numb is a bad sign. It's a wonder he lived as long as he did,
after what happened to him."

"I'll say so!" agreed Roger. "Tough luck all right!"

"Why," went on his chum as they started back toward their former
places, "it looked as if his whole face was blown in. I can't
understand it"

"Well, they'll do the best they can for him back there," and Roger
nodded toward the dressing stations. "Maybe we'll get a chance to go
to see him after this battle."

His words were drowned in a new roar of artillery and machine-gun
fire. The heavy booming and the short, sharp, rattling explosions of
the smaller guns seemed very close at hand.

"Something's doing!" cried Jimmy.

"Come on!" shouted his chum, and, with their rifles and gas masks,
which they had brought up out of the shell hole, they rushed forward.
And as they advanced they became aware of shrill, whistling sounds in
the air about them.

"Duck! Duck!" yelled Roger. "They're firing over our sector now!
We've got to crawl back!"

Jimmy realized this as well as did his chum, and, in another moment,
the two were making their way back to their line as they had left it,
by alternately moving on their hands and knees and again by working
themselves forward on their elbows and stomach. It was the only safe
way. The horizontal storm of missiles was, fortunately, about three
feet above them, but that distance precluded walking upright.

"Come on, boys! Fall in! Fall in!" cried their lieutenant as Roger and
Jimmy got back "We're going to advance. You're just in time!"

"Did you find him?" asked Bob, as he leaped to his feet in readiness
for a dash toward the German lines.

"Yes. In a shell hole!" yelled Jimmy, for the firing was heavy on both
sides of them now, making a vicious din.

"Alive!" Franz wanted to know.

"Yes, alive, but how long he'll be that way it's hard to say,"
answered Roger. "He was under a pile of dirt and--"

"Come on! Come on!" cried the lieutenant. "We're going to finish the
job!"

He was leading his men, not driving them on as do the Germans,
and nobly the four Brothers and their fellows followed the gallant
lieutenant.

On they rushed--ever onward. About them swept the leaden hail of
death. Shoulder to shoulder, firing from the hip, rushed the four
Khaki Boys. And even in that terrible din of battle they spared a
thought for the gallant comrade who would have been with him if he
could.

With wild yells the Sammies swept over the first line of German
trenches. The Boches had deserted them in the face of a withering
rifle and machine-gun fire.

"Come on! Come on!" yelled the lieutenant again and again. "They're
laying down a perfect barrage for us! The Huns can't get through to
attack us!"

This was true, to a certain extent. Supported by the big guns in the
rear, the 509th Infantry was rushing onward. Before them, and ever
moving forward, was a never-ending curtain of fire--a hail of lead and
steel.

As this curtain advanced, caused by the continual but slow elevation
of the muzzles of the big guns, the infantry followed. And this fire
kept the German support from coming to save the lines that were under
attack.

"Wipe 'em out! Wipe out the Hun nests!" cried the lieutenant.

"It's our turn now!" grimly shouted Roger in Jimmy's ear.

Forward swept the company to which our heroes were assigned. For a
time, during which the two chums had had a chance to get Iggy from the
shell hole, there had been no advance. Now it came with a vengeance.

But the Germans were not idle. If their infantry was held back
from making a counter-attack, their heavy guns, and here and there,
machine-guns, were not idle. And these weapons tore big holes in the
ranks of the Sammies. But ever the holes were closed up--comparatively
closed up, that is, for the fighting of the Americans was not in close
order, such as that in which the Germans so often advanced to their
deaths.

At times the four Brothers would be close to one another, converging
to get out of the line of some trench or avoid a shell hole. Again
they would be yards apart But they kept in "contact," as it is called.

And ever as they advanced they fired their rifles into the German
lines. True they could only now and then catch a glimpse of the foe,
but they made those chances tell.

"Come on now, boys--a little farther and we'll have our objective!
Just a few yards more!" cried the lieutenant who was leading our
heroes. "Once we're at that barn, we can rest. Only a few feet
more--only a few--"

His yelling voice suddenly ceased, and Jimmy, who was nearest, saw the
gallant soldier crumple up, with a bullet through his head. And as he
fell his men behind him, leaped over his body with wild yells of rage.

"Come on! Come on!" screamed Jimmy, inflamed to the point of madness.
He was in command at this point now, following the death of the
lieutenant. "Come on! Make 'em pay for that!" He choked back his sobs,
for the lieutenant was well beloved.

On they rushed, on and on. The man on Jimmy's left was killed, and the
comrade on his right fell with a shattered leg.

"I'm out of it!" suddenly shouted Franz, and he tried to hop on one
foot, falling, a moment later, in a shallow hole.

On the others rushed, and finally, with wild yells, they drove the
Germans from their last stand. The stone barn held a machine gun nest,
and many of the Sammies were killed or wounded before the crew of
Huns were scattered or captured--and there were very few of this last
class, so desperate was their resistance.

From somewhere came the signal to cease firing, and, a little later, a
captain came along and took charge.

"Who's in command?" he asked, seeing no commissioned officer in the
group which had for a nucleus Jimmy, Roger and Bob.

"I am, sir," answered the former, saluting. "The lieutenant was
killed."

A twitch of the face, and a hardening of the muscles about the
captain's mouth were the only signs of emotion he showed, but his
heart was torn--the boys knew that. The lieutenant was his only
brother.

"Hold this place at all costs!" was the grim order. "I'll send an
officer to take charge shortly. But hold the place!"

"Yes, sir." and Jimmy saluted again.

Quickly they took measures to do this--to make the stone barn, once
the part of a French farm homestead, a position of defense. The German
machine-gun, for which there was considerable ammunition left, was
turned to point at the Hun line. But the Boches had withdrawn some
distance. The Sammies had gained their objective, and the battle, for
the time being, was over. Now there might come a counter-attack, and
for this Jimmy, temporarily in command, prepared with his chums.

"Bob," called Jimmy to the former reporter, "you and Roger go back and
see if you can pick up Franz, or any other of our lads who are alive.
See what they need, and, if it's possible, get first-aid to them."

This was a welcome order to these two Khaki Boys and they started back
over the ground won at such terrible cost. Already, though, gallant
stretcher-bearers were searching among the dead to succor the living.
And then, to their unutterable delight, Roger and Bob saw Franz
limping toward them, using his rifle as a crutch.

"Thought you were done for, like poor Iggy," cried Roger.

"I thought so, too," answered Schnitz. "I felt sure my foot was lopped
off, but it was only bruised on the ankle by a stone that some piece
of shell must have kicked up. It's only badly bruised. I don't have to
go to the rear!" and he said this joyously.

But there were many poor lads who did have to go to the rear, for they
were torn and mangled. And there were some who had made their last
fight. But it was a good fight. Oh, it was a good and noble fight! Be
sure of that!

Assisting Franz, Roger and Bob got back to the barn, and there they took
off their comrade's shoe. As he had said, his ankle was only bruised. He
was able to limp along.

The Hun fighters had received more than they wanted. They had not only
withdrawn to a good distance, but they did not even have nerve enough
to launch a counter-attack. The American advance had been so well
prepared that it won the battle.

"Well, now we have time to breathe and eat," commented Jimmy, who had
been relieved in command.

"Say, a lot of things have happened since the zero hour this morning,"
remarked Roger.

"You said it!" declared Bob fervently. "If I was only on the paper
now I could write a front page story, instead of a miserable little
'stick' about a runaway horse. Oh, but this was some fight!"

It was toward evening, and the tired doughboys were wondering what the
night would hold for them, when Jimmy remarked:

"I'm going to see if I can find Sergeant Maxwell."

"What's the matter with him?" asked Roger.

"Nothing, I hope. But I gave him those five thousand francs to keep
for me--you know, the reward money--_our_ money," explained Jimmy, for
it was that, as you shall see. "I want to get it back, now that the
battle is over. We won't go into action very soon again, I'm thinking.
I just gave him the notes to keep for me until this scrap was over.
Now I think I'll get 'em back again, and divide 'em up."

"Are you going to persist in your generous notion?" asked Bob.

"I sure am!" was the somewhat indignant answer. "What do you think I
am, anyhow, an Injun giver? I said we five Brothers would share and
share alike in that reward, and I'm going to insist on it. If Iggy--if
he's killed--his share goes to his folks. Why, you fellows helped as much
in putting that dog Von Kreitzen out of the way as I did."

"Nonsense!" declared Roger. "You did it all alone!"

"Well, I'm not going to spend the reward all alone, and that's
settled!" snapped Jimmy. "It's going to be whacked up, just as I
promised. Now I'm going to find Maxwell and get the dough. Why, of
course, I'm going to divide it. And I'll be glad to get my share right
now. We haven't had any pay in some time, and goodness knows when I'll
hear from home."

"Or Buffalo," added Bob, with a laugh.

"Yes, or Buffalo," agreed Jimmy. He had admitted that his "girl" lived
there--a girl to whom he often referred as "Margaret," but beyond this
he had said little of her. "So I'm going out to find Maxwell. I'll be
back soon," he promised.

He received the necessary permission and was soon scouting about,
back of the German trench lines, which had been taken over by the
victorious Americans.

"Seen Maxwell?" asked Jimmy of a fellow non-commissioned officer who,
he knew, was in Maxwell's mess.

"Maxwell? No, I haven't seen him lately. Didn't you hear about him?"

"Hear what about him? What do you mean?" asked Jimmy, and he was
conscious of a strange foreboding.

"Why, Sergeant Maxwell has been missing since just about the time we
got word to go over the top at the zero hour," stated Corporal Blake,
to whom Jimmy had applied. "I thought you knew that."

"No, I didn't," said Jimmy quietly. Then he whistled.

"What's the matter?" asked Blake.

"If Maxwell is missing then it's a double loss," was the answer.

"A double loss? What do you mean?"

"I mean my five thousand francs are gone, too. Whew! Well, it can't be
helped, I suppose. I'll go tell the boys!"




CHAPTER V

WHAT'S TO BE DONE?


"What's the matter. Blazes?" cried Bob, as he saw his friend coming
back.

"You look as if we'd lost the war!"

"Well, I've lost part of something I won in it, anyhow," declared
Jimmy.

"Is Iggy dead?" Franz wanted to know. "Did you hear any word from
him?"

"No, but we must make some inquiries. This is about something else.
Fellows, I guess I'll have to wait until I get a remittance from
home before I give you your shares of the thousand dollars reward."

"Wait for a remittance!" exclaimed Roger. "Not that I'm altogether
sure I'm going to take what you call my 'share' of that; but why do
you have to wait?"

"Because the money's gone," said Jimmy, tragically. In France, three
thousand miles away from home, with their army pay uncertain, ready
cash meant much to our doughboys.

"Gone! Did you lose it?" asked Bob, with a reportorial instinct.

"No, but Maxwell is gone and the money's gone with him. He's missing,"
Jimmy hastened to explain. "Been missing since just before we went
into action."

"Where was the sergeant stationed?" asked Roger.

"In that big concrete dugout we captured from the Germans in the
scrap just before this," Jimmy explained. "He was in command of a hand
grenade squad there, and just before the fight, or at least soon after
the signal to advance was given, that was the last seen of Sergeant
Maxwell and my money," added the owner of it ruefully.

His companions received the news in silence. Then Franz spoke up and
asked:

"What's to be done? I don't so much mean about the money," he added
quickly, as he saw the others look curiously at him. "That doesn't
matter, though, of course, I'll be glad of my share, and it's mighty
generous of you, Blazes, to offer to whack up. But I mean what's to be
done about Sergeant Maxwell? Do you suppose he--"

He did not finish, but his meaning was obvious.

"If you mean, do I think he went away with it, I most certainly do
_not_," declared Jimmy, positively. "A thousand dollars isn't enough
to make a man skip out."

"A thousand dollars is a lot to some people--I know it is to _me_,"
said Bob. "I worked hard on the _Chronicle_, and it never brought me a
thousand dollars--at least not all at once."

"Me either--when I was slaving in the munition plant, and running a
chance of being blown up every minute," declared Roger. "But I think
Schnitz is right--what's to be done! Maybe Maxwell was robbed, and he
started after the thief and--"

"'Maybe' won't get us anywhere," said Jimmy. "Of course, I'd rather
lose the five thousand francs ten times over than have anything happen
to Maxwell. And I'd like to know where he is for his own sake. At the
same time I'd like to get that money back, as much for my own sake
as for you fellows," he added. "I can very nicely use a bit of spare
cash."

"So can I," chimed in Franz. "Maybe we'll have a chance to hunt for
the serg. after this place quiets down a bit."

"I hope so," sighed Jimmy. Really he was more affected than he liked
to admit, and it was not altogether over the loss of the money,
either. He had been firm friends with the missing man--not as close a
chum as with his four Brothers, but enough so that there was a genuine
loss in his disappearance.

"Well, we'll see what we can do," decided Bob. "We've got to look
after Iggy, too--that is, if he's alive. But we can't do anything
along either line to-night."

"No, I guess not," agreed Jimmy. "Some of us'll have to do sentry go,
I expect, or take a listening post."

And he was right in his surmise. He and Bob were detailed to take a
trick at a listening post--to be on the alert for any possible advance
of the temporarily defeated Germans. Franz, because of his bruised
ankle, was not put on duty. Indeed, he came near being sent to the
rear for treatment when an officer discovered his hurt.

"It'll be all right in the morning," declared the youth of German
blood, who, nevertheless, was such an ardent hater of the Kaiser and
his "Potsdam gang," as a certain preacher has called the Hun ruler's
associates. "I'm simply not going to the hospital! Captain, there'll
be fighting in the morning; won't there, sir?"

"Very likely," was the grim answer.

"Then I'm going to stay, sir!" declared Franz, forgetting that he
was speaking to his superior officer. "I'll be able to walk in the
morning, and I want to get some more of the beasts!" and he fairly
snarled the word. No true-blooded American hated the Huns as did Franz
Schnitzel, of German parentage.

"Very well," assented the captain. "You may stay until morning, at
least."

"Thank you, sir," replied Franz, saluting. He knew in his heart that
he would never give in, no matter how his ankle hurt, and the pain was
not inconsiderable, either.

There came a reaction after the fierce fighting of the morning and
early afternoon, and when night came, and the lads, with only a short
period of rest, had to go out on sentry or other duty, there was a
weariness of body, and a queer feeling of the mind, that did not make
the occasion one of pleasure.

But duty was duty and it had to be done.

Jimmy and Bob had an advanced listening post, and they took their
positions about ten o 'clock that night. It was dark and a drizzling
rain was falling.

"I'd much rather go to bed in a dugout," declared Jimmy, stifling a
yawn.

"Same here," agreed Bob. "Say, what do you s'pose happened to Maxwell,
anyhow!"

"Can't imagine, unless he's been killed or captured. If he was within
our lines some one would have heard of it. Or perhaps they wouldn't
either, in all this excitement. It may take two or three days to
locate him, if he's alive."

"And if he isn't--or is a prisoner?" suggested Bob.

"Then good-bye to our thousand dollars," sighed Jimmy.

"I'm thinking of poor Iggy, too," said Bob, after a pause. "Do you
think he has any chance!"

"Well, he didn't appear to be badly wounded. But if his spine is
broken he'll never fight again, and may not live very long. That's
a fierce state of affairs. How he escaped being killed outright is
a wonder to me. You ought to have seen him after Roger and I dug him
out," and in a whisper, for loud talking was forbidden, he related the
scene in the shell hole.

He had scarcely finished his narration when Bob peered out from
their improvised shelter and seemed to be looking at something
intently--that is, as intently as he could in the rainy darkness.

"What is it?" asked Jimmy cautiously.

"I don't know," was the answer. "But someone, or something, is
crawling this way. Look right straight ahead. See it moving?"




CHAPTER VI

GOOD STEWS


For a moment Jimmy could see nothing. Possibly this was because he
strained his eyes too much, but of course he was looking out into a
darkness so black that it seemed to swallow up everything. And
there was rain, too, a misty, drizzling rain, which alone would have
hampered vision. Then Jimmy closed his strained orbs, and when he
opened them again his vision was nearer normal.

"Do you see it yet?" whispered Bob. "Squint along my finger."

Jimmy did so.

"You have pretty good eyes to see anything in this blackness," he was
saying when he suddenly became aware of something moving out there
among the holes caused by the American shells.

It was more, he said afterward, as though part of the darkness itself
moved rather than that he actually saw something. But it was enough to
direct his attention to what Bob pointed out.

"It _is_ something," was Jimmy's cautious declaration. "And coming
this way!"

There was a movement on the part of Bob, and his chum knew he was
getting his rifle in readiness. Jimmy followed this example. They were
on the alert.

"Don't fire until you challenge," cautioned Jimmy. "It might be one of
our fellows, you know."

"One of our fellows--out there? How could it be!"

"Might have advanced too far, been wounded and have waited for
darkness to crawl back to our lines. Wait a second more until we see
what he's up to."

"It's a man, sure!" Bob whispered, "and he's crawling toward us on his
stomach."

"Let's do the same ourselves and crawl out to meet him," suggested
Jimmy. "If he has a grenade, or a bomb, and tries to throw it, we may
forestall him."

"Our orders were to stay here," decided Bob, and he was a great
stickler for obeying orders to the letter. Perhaps even his small
newspaper experience was responsible for this.

Suddenly the silence of the darkness was broken by an unmistakable
sneeze. True, the sneezer, if I may use such a term, tried to stifle
the explosion, but he was not altogether successful. It was a sneeze,
and nothing could disguise it.

"Did you hear--" began Bob.

And then, to the greater surprise of the two listeners, there came a
muttered exclamation in _German_.

"For the love of gas masks!" breathed Jimmy. "Take aim, Bob!"

And in another moment the fire of two rifles would have been
concentrated on that moving splotch of blackness, whence had come the
sneeze, except that the guttural German expletive was followed by a
tense whisper. And the words came in good English.

"Don't shoot, boys! I'm Schnitz!"

Bob said, afterward, that the reaction was so great that he actually
had a fit of nervous shivering, and Jimmy admitted the same. They
fully expected a rush of the Huns, but they had made up their minds
that first they would "get" the advance guard in the shape of the
man who had sneezed. And then to hear the unmistakable voice of their
comrade in arms!

It was almost unbelievable, and, for a moment, both listening lads had
a doubt. This might be some trick of the Germans, and "Schnitz" was a
sufficiently common Teutonic name, shortened as it was. But a moment
later the voice from the darkness went on in the same cautious
whisper:

"Don't fire, Bob--Jimmy! If you do, you'll spoil a little
surprise-party."

"Say, what does this mean!" asked Jimmy, a bit sternly, for he was
suffering from a reaction.

"You're supposed to be in the dugout, or somewhere back there," said
Bob, when Franz had crawled to them and had arisen to stand beside
them. "What brought you out? Were you sent?"

"I sent myself," was the laconic answer. "I couldn't stand it being
cooped up back there. My ankle felt a lot better, and I took French
leave, as it were. I sneaked out and I crawled over toward the Hun
trenches. And say, I've got some information that the K.O. will give
his eye teeth to have. They're raising a little party to come over and
try to get back some of the land we took from 'em this morning. The
Huns are going to raid our position in half an hour."

"Are you sure?" demanded Bob, and yet he knew that Franz would not say
it if it were not so.

"Well, I'm as sure as one can be of anything in this war," was the
answer in a whisper, all the talk being of that calibre. "I crawled
over until I could hear the sentries talking. Then I located a dugout.
The door was open and more talk floated out. I heard enough to tell
me that the raid is going to be made just before daylight and on this
position."

"You mean where we are?" asked Bob.

"As nearly as I can tell," answered Franz, whose knowledge of the
German language had again done him and his friends such good service.

"Whew!" softly whistled Jimmy. "We'd better get word to the K.O. in
a jiffy. You'll get blue streaks, though, Schnitz, for disobeying
orders."

"Oh, I guess not," was the easy answer. "It'll all be forgotten in
the excitement. I just had to go out. I heard where you fellows were
stationed on listening post and I started out with the intention of
crawling back to your position. Hit it, too; didn't I?"

"That sneeze came near causing you to be hit, and with something
harder than a rubber ball," said Jimmy grimly. "Bob? you'd better go
back with him and let him tell his yarn to the captain. He doesn't
know the password, and I'll have to stay here on duty. But hurry back
and let me know what the word is."

"Right-O!" assented Bob, and a moment later he and Franz were
stumbling back over the rough ground, and through the rain and
darkness, toward the dugout where the officer in charge of that
particular sector was on duty. A captured German dugout had been taken
over, and such comforts as it afforded were utilized.

Just as Franz had surmised, the import of the news he brought in
wiped out his offense against orders. He told in detail what he had
overheard, and quick, sharp commands were at once sent out over
the telephone, for the engineers had hastily strung wires when the
advanced posts had been taken by the onrushing American doughboys.

And the information Franz had secured by his bold act proved correct
in every detail. The Germans, smarting under their defeat, were
determined on revenge. The raiding party came over--but they found the
Americans ready.

It was not a large raid, not as large as Franz, in his enthusiasm, had
intimated. And it was evidently undertaken to get back the commanding
position occupied by that part of the 509th to which the five Brothers
were assigned.

But with the advent of the foe the Americans opened such a fire
from rifles, hand grenades and light artillery, while the scene was
illuminated by flaring lights, that the Huns were almost completely
wiped out. A number of prisoners were taken, for the Boches, once they
found the tide of battle going against them, threw down their guns and
cried: "_Kamerad_!"

Sharp as was the fighting, it was only a slight incident in the great
war. Such skirmishes, or trench raids, were occurring all along the
Western front every night. But slight as it was it took the lives of
several gallant American lads, and a number were wounded. Roger
Barlow received a slight flesh wound, but he refused to go back to the
dressing station, insisting on getting back into the fight when his
hurt had received first-aid treatment.

"The only trouble was, though," Roger said later, "that the scrap was
all over when I got back from the first-aid post. Pity you fellows
couldn't have kept it going until I could join you."

"Better to have it over with sharp and sudden than drag along,"
replied Jimmy. "They killed poor Baker right in front of me," he
added, naming a "bunkie" of whom he and the five Brothers were very
fond. "I might just as well have received that bullet."

"Yes. It's a queer world," mused Bob. "If it hadn't been that Franz
went out against orders and got information, we might all be dead
now."

And this was true.

Once more silence settled down over the trenches, but it was now
almost morning, and with the breaking of dawn the rain that had been a
drizzle all night settled into a steady downpour.

"Not much fighting to-day," decided Roger, when the four Brothers were
at breakfast together--and a cold breakfast at that, for there was no
fuel to heat the coffee, though word went around that the traveling
kitchens were on their way toward the trenches.

Roger was right. Each side consolidated its positions, and each seemed
waiting for what the other might do. This state of affairs continued
for three days, during which the rain lasted. Save for an occasional
artillery duel at night, precipitated often by some nervous sentry
firing his rifle, there was no actual battle.

At the first chance, when he was off duty, Jimmy secured permission to
go back to their former headquarters.

"I want to find out about Iggy if I can," he said, "and also make
inquiries about Sergeant Maxwell and that money I owe you fellows."

"You don't owe it to us!" declared Roger.

"I sure do!" was the answer. "Just as much as if I'd borrowed it from
you!" declared Jimmy. "And I'm going to pay up, too!"

He returned from his little trip much sooner than his comrades had
expected. There was a joyous light in his face as he greeted them, and
cried:

"Good news, fellows! Good news!"




CHAPTER VII

UNDER FIERCE FIRE


There were so many sorts of good news possible for Jimmy to have
brought back from the former headquarters at the rear that, for a
moment, his three chums did not know what question to put next.

The war might be over, though until the Germans were worse whipped
than they then were there would be poor satisfaction in that,
reflected Roger.

It was Bob, however, who blurted out:

"Is Iggy all right?"

"You said it!" cried Jimmy, dancing around "like a venerable ostrich,"
as Bob said afterward. "He isn't all right, exactly, for he's pretty
badly mussed up. But he's not going West, and if that isn't good news
I don't know what is!"

"That's the best news you've given us since you said the soup kitchens
were on their way the day after the big fight," declared Schnitz. "How
much is he hurt?"

"Well, really not any at all, except for some bad bruises, and he
says they'll be better in a day or so. No internal injuries that the
doctors can find, and outside of the bruises and scratches--and he has
them in plenty--he's as good as any of us."

"But how in the world did it happen?" asked Bob. "Didn't you see him
with his head all caved in and his spine broken?"

"Well, I thought I did," admitted Jimmy. "But the fact is that the
blood on his face, as I guess I told you before, came from a man who
was killed by a shell, right in front of Iggy. And that numb feeling
of his legs was because they were both 'asleep'. You know, when you
lie too long on your arm, or keep your leg in a cramped position. He
got all over that after he'd been in bed a few hours.

"You see the stuff that caved in on him, after the shell exploded,
formed a sort of arch over his head, and took the weight off his face.
He'd have been dead except for that. But he's practically all right,
and will be back with us soon. He's crazy to see you fellows. I
thought he'd kiss me, the way some of the Frenchies do when they get
excited."

"Well, we'll go to see him as soon as we get leave," decided Bob.

"Don't think I'm asking this because of the money involved," said
Schnitz, a little later, "though we all agree that it's fine and
generous of you to have offered to whack up. But did you hear anything
of Sergeant Maxwell?"

"Not a word," declared Jimmy, "nor the missing five thousand francs,
either. Both have mysteriously disappeared."

"What's the official report on the serg.?" asked Roger.

"Just missing--that's all," said Jimmy, simply. "I made inquiries
about him as soon as I had located Iggy in a hospital. Sergeant
Maxwell is down as missing. Of course, there's no report about my
money. In fact, we five, and the serg. himself, are the only ones who
know about it."

"Missing," mused Bob. "Does it say without official leave, or anything
like that?"

"No, it doesn't," went on the owner of the five thousand francs. "He
isn't classed as a deserter--yet."

"Do you think he will be?" Franz wanted to know, impressed by
something in Jimmy's voice.

The latter did not reply for a moment. And then he felt that he must
not only be generous but just. So he said:

"No, I don't! Sergeant Maxwell has proved himself too many times to be
as straight as a die, to go wrong now. I don't really believe he went
away purposely with my money. He may be wounded, and have wandered
into the German lines. If he did, with that cash on him--good-night
little old five thousand francs!" and Jimmy pretended to kiss them
adieu. "And, fellows, we mustn't forget that he may be lying dead in
some rain-filled shell hole," he went on softly. "We'll just suspend
judgment, that's all. Forget the bad news about Maxwell and remember
the good news about Iggy. And we'll all go to see Ig as soon as we
can."

"You said it!" declared Bob. "I won't forget how it seemed like a bit
of home and heaven to me, Jimmy, when you came to the hospital where
I was. We sure will go cheer up Iggy!"

"He wants to write to his mother the worst way," went on Jimmy. "And
he insists on writing in English. You know how his letters read, but
he simply won't stick to Polish which he can handle all right. It's
got to be English or nothing."

"Did he write?" asked Roger.

"Not while I was there. His wrist is still too sore. But he made me
promise to bring paper, a pen, and everything, when I came again,
and, if he can't write, one of us is to do it for him--but in English,
mind!"

"Well do it!" declared Bob.

It was three days later when they all received permission to go to the
rear and call on Iggy who was still in the hospital, though likely to
be discharged as cured inside of a week. There was still a lull in the
fighting about the sector where our five Brothers, or, rather, four,
were stationed. But there was an indefinite something in the air that
told of fierce battles to come. The Huns had too much at stake to wait
long.

"Ach! So glad it is I am to see you!" voiced Iggy, when the four
were admitted to him. "Dit you paper and pen pring!" he asked Jimmy,
eagerly. "I myself can write to mother now. See, shmine wrist she is
all so K.O. now."

"K.O.?" cried Roger. "What's the commanding officer got to do with
your wrist, Iggy?" For, of course, you know that the commanding
officer in an army is designated as "K.O."

"He means O.K." declared Jimmy. "Got his letters twisted; that's all.
He means his wrist is all right."

"His wrist is all right and his letter will be all write," punned
Roger.

"That will be about all from you!" commented Bob, sternly.

"Yes, Iggy, I've got all the makings for a first-class screed," went
on Jimmy with a smile. "Do you want to write yourself, or shall I?"

"Myself will I do it," said Iggy, simply. And when, after considerable
labor, mental and physical, he handed the scribbled paper to Jimmy,
he said: "Read her and see much how better as I do him in English now.
Read him," and he indicated the letter he had written to his mother.
And, to please him, and because there was nothing very personal in the
epistle, Jimmy read it. His chums, at Iggy's request, read it also.
And this is what Iggy's four Brothers saw:

"Deer Mother. In bed am i and a pritty lady she bring to me all i can
eats good, i was not shooted like is some of thee soljiers, but on me
fell rocks and stoanes so i was moastly mushed but Roger and jimmee
thay gat me oaut. i tell you of loav for yon i have mauch. soon i go
fightting agen wich is batter than in hoarse-pottle bein. i got bumps
an kuts but noat mooch alse. jimee he is to give me soam moaney what
he gat for killing a bad germans and wen i gats my share to you i it
sand will yet. good-bye deer Mother from your loafing soan Iggy."

"That's a dandy letter!" declared Jimmy when he had finished reading
it. "I'll get it right off for you, Iggy."

"Better writing I am doing yes, is it not?" anxiously inquired the
Polish lad.

"You bet!" declared Bob, and his eyes, as well as those of his chums,
were moist, for there was a pathetic note in the missive, in spite of
its queerness.

"He knew enough to use a capital now and then, which is more than he
did at Camp Sterling," declared Bob, when they had left the hospital,
to go back to their stations.

"You didn't tell him that his share of the five thousand francs, as
well as yours and ours, was missing; did you?" inquired Franz.

"What was the use?" asked Jimmy. "Poor Iggy has troubles enough as it
is. But he'll get his share all right to send home."

"Just like Jimmy Blazes," declared Roger to Bob, afterward.

It was three or four days after this that Iggy was able to leave the
hospital, and take his place with his chums.

"The five Brothers are together again!" cried Jimmy, when the reunion
took place. "Now let the Huns tremble!"

"By golly yes!" declared the Polish lad. "I fight can now like three
soldiers, so much did they give me eats in the hoarspottle. A fine
place she is--tha hoarspottle.

"But the longer we can keep out of such places as hospitals the
better," remarked Jimmy. "Now then, Iggy, what is it you want most?"

"Well, Blazes, if you excuse me--but you did say you would the reward
moany crack among us. No, it was not crack; he was a word--"

"Split!" suggested Bob.

"Yas. Him it was. You say you split him--that moany, Jimmy, and if I
could to my mothar send what you say you give me--maybe she of need
have for him now."

Jimmy looked queerly at his chums. Truth to tell he had scarcely
any cash at present, and to give Iggy his share of the five thousand
francs--about two hundred dollars--was out of the question.

Bob took the financial bull by the horns.

"Look here, Iggy," he said. "Jimmy has played hard luck. He had that
money but--"

"Doan't tell me he is loss!" cried Iggy. "Oh, doan't tell me he is
loss! I so much think of that two hundred dollars--mine fader or mine
mothar never so much have at once see in all their lives. Two hundred
dollar--Oh if he is loss--"

"It's only lost for a while--temporarily," said Jimmy. "I wasn't going
to tell you, but Bob spilled the beans, I left the cash with Sergeant
Maxwell to keep for me, and the sergeant is missing with the dough.
But as soon as I get my money from home you'll get your share--the two
hundred bucks, Iggy, and so will the others."

"Nonsense! Forget it!" cried Roger. "Do you think--"

But he had a chance for no more, for at that moment came the signal
that the Huns had launched a gas attack. Instantly the five Brothers,
and all up and down the line the other Americans, donned their gas
masks. This was but the preliminary to what turned out to be some
of the fiercest fighting of that particular series of battles. The
Germans followed up the gas attack with a fierce deluge of shells and
shrapnel, and half an hour later our heroes were under heavy fire.

"It's an attack in force!" cried a lieutenant as he hurried along the
trench where the Khaki Boys were stationed. "And the word is, stand
where you are! Don't give back an inch!"

His words were drowned in the roar of big guns.




CHAPTER VIII

THE OLD MILL


Silently the five Brothers, again united and ready to fight to the
death, gazed at one another as they lined up in the trench. That is
they were silent as regards conversation, for they could not talk
with their gas masks on, and the warning given by the lieutenant--the
warning and the admonition to stand fast--had been the last words he
uttered before he, too, donned the protecting device. And no sooner
had the five Brothers and those about them begun to breathe through
the chemicals that destroyed the terrible chlorine, than over it came
rolling in a deadly, yellowish cloud.

And yet it was far from silent in that hideous storm, for the very
ground shook and trembled with the intensity of the gun-fire--the
gun-fire not only of the Germans but the Allies as well.

It was an attack in force, and the fire was of the fiercest. Protected
somewhat by the trench, in which they were, nevertheless the members
of the company to which our heroes belonged sustained several
casualties.

At one place a high explosive shell struck on the very edge of the
trench, caving it in, and burying beneath tons of earth and stone the
unfortunate Sammies stationed there. And the worst of it was that no
adequate revenge could be taken just then--at least no revenge that
was visible to the enraged comrades of the killed and wounded.

For the orders were to stay in the trenches and repel the attack at
first. Later the counter-attack on the part of the Americans would
take place, and then it might be that the Huns would be made to pay
dearly for their work.

Jimmy looked through the grotesque goggles of his gas mask at his
chums. If appearances went for anything they were on the alert and
ready to jump over the top at the signal and fight to the death. But
the word was delayed, for what, doubtless, were good military reasons.
There was little that could be accomplished in firing one's rifle over
the top of the trench. This was all right in the case of sniping, but
for a general attack the work had to be done by the artillery, big and
little. Later would come the rush in the open, or the standing fast
to repel the attack of the gray hordes. And then the rifle fire of the
infantry would tell.

It was hard waiting--to be stuck down in what was, literally, a "mud
hole," and stay there while, over one's head, shrilled and screamed
the big shells, that must create untold havoc, damage and death in the
rear.

Fortunately, however, as was learned later, the Germans did not have
the range accurately. They wasted much of their fire on unoccupied
ground in the immediate rear of the American position, and it was only
an occasional shell that landed near the trenches. So the position of
our heroes was not as bad as at first they imagined.

But it seemed bad enough, and the firing from the Hun positions was
intense, and as long as Jimmy, Bob and the others did not know that
the Boches did not have them under accurate fire, they suffered nearly
as much mentally, as though the knowledge had been positive.

For an hour or two the terrific artillery duel kept up, the Germans
hoping to blast away all trenches, barbed wire entanglements and sweep
away any opposing forces so that the ground wrested away might be
gained back. And during this time the forces of the defenders of
liberty were, in the main, inactive. There was little to be gained in
rushing the enemy just yet. That time would come later.

And so under a deluge of high explosives, of shrapnel, of trench bombs
and the deadly gas the five Khaki Boys and their comrades in arms
suffered--physically and mentally. For a gas mask is both physical
and mental torture. It is safe, and that is about the best that can
be said for it. Merely to sit quietly with one on is a torture, and to
work or fight in one is about the limit of human endurance.

Still the orders were to keep them on, and they were kept. But more
than once Roger, Franz or Iggy would look around as though for a sight
of some one in authority who would tell them to remove the hideous
head-pieces.

But the Huns still kept sending over the poisonous gas from shells and
from the big cylinders of it they had brought up to the front lines.
And the wind was in their favor, blowing straight toward the American
lines, so that the deadly yellow fumes came over in rolling clouds.

And then, somehow, word came back to the officers in charge of the
big American guns that their shells were having an effect on the Hun
artillery. Piece after piece of the Boche batteries were silenced,
and at last the Sammies began to obtain mastery of the artillery
situation.

And then it was that a barrage could be laid down, and an advance
attack made. But it had to be made under somewhat adverse conditions,
for gas masks must be worn. And to leap from the trench, and stumble
over No Man's Land, under heavy fire, and discharge one's own rifle,
all the while wearing one of the canvas and rubber contraptions, was
not real fighting--at least so Jimmy said afterward.

But such it had to be, and at the signal the five Brothers leaped up
with their comrades and went over the top again--over the top of the
trenches that had either been dug when the new position was taken and
held, or over the top of some of the trenches wrested previously from
the Germans.

There was no shouting and yelling, such as often and ordinarily
preceded an attack over the top. One can not shout in a gas mask. But
there was shouting in the hearts of the Sammies as they rushed forward
to do their share in destroying the beast from the earth.

Upward and onward they rushed and then they were in the midst of the
battle. And yet not exactly in the midst, for the actual conflict was
rather of longer distance than that. Hand-to-hand fighting had not yet
occurred. But they advanced, firing as they rushed on, not in close
formation, for that offered too good a target, but separated. They
would fire, rush on, drop to earth, rise again, fire and rush on. And
so it went.

And then, after an hour or two, there came a sudden shift in the
wind. It was presaged by a calm, so that the deadly chlorine gas rose
straight up instead of being blown over the American lines. And then,
with a suddenness that must have been disconcerting to the Huns, the
gas was blown back in their very faces.

Without doubt such fiends as devised that form of fighting were, in
a way, prepared for this, and had their gas masks ready. There were
times, in the early stages of the gas war, when often whole companies
of Germans would be wiped out by a sudden change in the wind, when gas
was being sent over. But the Boches learned from experience.

However, whether or not the return of their own gas worked any havoc
among the Germans it did one good thing; it enabled Jimmy and his
chums, as well as their comrades, to remove their own oppressive
head-coverings, after a certain time had elapsed.

Once they took them off, they sniffed cautiously of the air. There
was none of the choking taint of the chlorine--a gas which seems
to dissolve the lung tissues--the air was sweet and pure--that is,
comparatively so, though it was odorous with powder fumes. But these
were a perfume compared to chlorine.

"Oh, this is better!" cried Jimmy, as he breathed deep and filled his
lungs naturally, for though there is everything to be said in favor
of the gas mask when an attack is on, one can not breathe naturally in
it.

"I should say so!" agreed Bob.

"Well, where do we go from here?" chanted Roger.

Their particular fighting contingent had been halted in a grain field.
All about them, that is up and down such a line as had been formed,
the fighting was going on.

And on either side of them, and in front and behind, there was
the rumble and roar and thunder of heavy guns. In the ranks of the
comrades of the five Brothers there were bloody gaps. They had won
their way thus far at no small sacrifice of life and limb. But, so
far, our friends had escaped scatheless, though they all bore wounds,
as you know.

It was a pleasant, sunny day--that is, it would have been pleasant had
it not been for the war. That spoiled the pleasantness, but nothing
could stop the sunshine. To the great orb that had seen the earth
formed, this fighting, momentous as it was destined to be, was only an
incident in the rolling on of the ages of time.

"Wonder why we're being held up?" ventured Franz. "I haven't had half
enough of fighting yet."

"Nor of me, neither," declared Iggy, who seemed to have recovered all
his spunk and spirit. "It is of a betterness to shoot lots when of a
gas mast you are delivered, yes?"

"Right, old top!" shouted Jimmy. "Hello!" he went on, as he saw the
major of the battalion approaching. "I guess here's where we get
orders!"

And they got them--orders to advance. And this time they went forward
with yells, for it was said that the gas attack was over--the kindly
wind had done its work well.

"There they are! There are the Huns!" cried Roger.

His chums looked, and saw dimly through the smoke, a gray line, like
some great worm, that would oppose their progress.

"Come on! Come on! Eat 'em up!" shouted Jimmy.

The others needed no urging. At the Huns they went--firing and being
fired at.

For a time it was a battle of rifles--the artillery and machine-guns
seemed to have been silenced temporarily. On rushed the Sammies, in
their own peculiar but comparatively safe, open formation. Rushing,
dropping, firing, up again, now down, but ever going onward, led by
their officers.

The Huns received the fire, and that it was deadly was evidenced by
the gaps torn in the gray ranks. Then they would close up, fire as
though by platoons, and come on slowly.

Suddenly the comparative slowness of the rifle fire was broken by the
staccato explosions of a machine-gun. It opened on the left of the
position taken up by Jimmy and his chums, and in an instant had mowed
down several doughboys.

"Take what cover you can!" shouted a lieutenant. "Where's that gun?
Did any one notice?" "Over in that red mill!" some one shouted.
Afterward it developed that this was Franz, who was an expert shot and
quick in judgment.

Dropping flat in the low-growing grain, many eyes of the Sammies
turned in the direction of the red mill. It was a French one, of
picturesque construction. And as Jimmy and his chums looked they saw
a little wisp of smoke come from one of the windows. Then came another
staccato discharge, but this time with less deadly effect.

"We've got to get that gun!" cried the lieutenant. "Volunteers wanted
to rush the red mill! Who'll come with me?"




CHAPTER IX

TRAPPED


Characteristic it was of the lieutenant to ask who would come with
him. American officers do that. A German would have said "Go!" The
American said "Come!"

And characteristic it was of the Sammies that everyone within the
sound of the young officer's voice answered, as one:

"_I will_!"

"Keep your heads down! You may get them knocked off soon enough when
the rush comes," went on the lieutenant, for in their eagerness to
answer and be selected for the dangerous mission, some had partly
raised themselves from their prone positions.

"There's no question but that's a German machine-gun in that old mill;
is there?" asked the lieutenant.

"Here's one of the bullets, sir," replied Roger, tossing over one that
had penetrated the earth near where he was lying, and come out after
striking a stone. "That's a bit of Hun lead all right."

He tossed it over to the officer, who was stretched out in the young,
green grain near by.

"Yes, that's German all right," was the answer. "It's larger than
ours. I thought perhaps some of our men might have gone in there to
pepper the Huns. Well, we've got to get it--that's all."

"And soon, too," murmured Jimmy. "Whew! This is fierce!"

A hail of lead from the weapon in the old red mill drew this
exclamation from him. Fortunately the men were low enough to escape
the worst of the firing, but some were wounded and one killed.

"There's two guns in that mill, sir!" called Franz, who was lying near
Bob. "They're both firing together."

"You're right," was the lieutenant's comment. "Well, so much the more
work for us to do. How many of us are here?"

It developed, by an improvised roll call, that there were fifteen,
including our five Brothers. With the lieutenant who was in immediate
command, there were sixteen.

"We'll all go!" was the officer's decision. "Fill your magazines, get
your hand grenades where you can reach 'em and be ready for the rush.
It's got to be a rush, and I hope it lasts long enough for some of us
to get there," he added soberly. "Boys, it's a desperate chance we're
taking, but a machine-gun nest there may hold up the advance. Maybe it
is holding it up. We've got to clean out the red mill!"

"We're with you!" cried Jimmy and the others.

And, as he spoke and the others cheered their assents, there came
another burst of fierce fire from the machine-guns hidden in the old
red mill. But there was too much elevation and the bullets, this time,
flew harmlessly over the backs of the Yanks.

"Now for it!" cried the lieutenant. "They may have to put in a fresh
belt of cartridges, or the guns may have heated or jammed. We'll take
a chance. We'll make three lines of five each. I'll lead one, and
there'll be six in that. Blaise, you take four men, and Simpson, you
take four. We'll spread out--fan shape--and don't stand upright--run
crouching. Now, Blaise and Simpson, pick your men, and give me the
word when you're ready."

Of course Jimmy picked his four Brothers, and they crawled up behind
him, ready for the word. Sergeant Simpson, a brave but somewhat
reckless lad, had four of his own choosing, and there were five who
crawled over to line up behind the lieutenant.

"All ready?" asked the officer. "Ready," answered Jimmy, and the other
leader gave a like reply.

"Then come on, and may we all live to get there!" cried the gallant
officer.

He arose to a crouching position and started to run toward the red
mill, followed by Jimmy and his four, and Simpson and his quartette.
And, as they rushed on, the automatic guns cut loose again.

The dust in the grain field rose in little spurts as the bullets
struck, and the rattle of the spiteful machine-gun made a chorus with
the snapping and popping of the American rifles. For Jimmy and the
others fired from the hip as they ran.

They could not hope to do much execution on the German gunners,
protected as the latter were by the old mill. But some chance bullet,
entering through crack or crevice, might end the activity of one or
more of the Hun crews. It was the only thing to do, however, until
they could come to hand grips--to cold steel--with the hidden Boches.

"Come on! Come on!" cried the lieutenant.

"Come on! Come on!" echoed Jimmy and Simpson.

They were nearing the red mill now. They could see no one in it, but
the sight of two windows, on either side of the big, open door, seemed
to give evidence of the location of the machine-guns. Smokeless powder
was being used, but there was a thin film of smoke, for all of that,
and this smoke floated from the two windows.

"There they are!" cried the lieutenant. "Come on, boys, we have 'em
now!"

But the glory of it was not to be--for him. Hardly had the words left
his mouth than he crumpled up, rolled completely over and lay still.
Afterward a dozen bullets were found in his body.

But the others halted not. The man immediately behind the fallen
lieutenant leaped over his lifeless body and led the advance, as Jimmy
and Simpson were doing.

They were close to the mill now. They could see the flashes of fire
coming from the guns which were shooting through the windows. And the
fire was deadly. Jimmy heard a yell from Franz, who was directly in
his rear. He did not dare stop or turn around but he shouted:

"Done for, Schnitz?"

"Only one finger nipped," was the grim answer. "Go on! We're with
you!"

One machine-gun concentrated on Simpson and his four gallant lads,
and, in less time than it takes for you to read these words, the five
lives were snuffed out.

"Come on! Come on!" yelled Jimmy. He was so mad with rage he hardly
knew what he was saying or doing. He saw a German face at one of the
windows. Quickly he fired. The face turned crimson with blood and
disappeared.

Mason, who was leading the other four, since the death of the
lieutenant, stumbled and fell twenty feet away from the red mill. One
of his companions assumed the lead of the three who were left, and
Jimmy and his four chums now converged with these four in a rush
toward the open portal.

They were now out of range of the guns, which could not be turned at
such an angle as to rake them. But hard fighting was yet to come.

"Wait!" shouted Jimmy, as he reached the threshold of the door, and
saw, to his left, a group of Huns about a gun that seemed to have
jammed. And not all the Huns were alive, either, showing that the fire
of the attacking party had done part of its work.

With a quick motion Jimmy threw a hand grenade into the midst of the
German crew, at the same time falling back himself behind the door
post, and pushing Bob, who was now next him, into the same safe
position.

There was a roar as the grenade burst, and smoke, for the moment,
obscured the scene. When it was blown away, drifting through the doors
and windows, there was no longer a German machine-gun crew, and all
that remained of the gun was torn and twisted metal.

Jimmy's quick action with the hand grenade had saved fierce fighting
for possession of the weapon. But the other remained--the second
on the other side of the main door of the mill. To this some of the
gallant lads gave their attention. With wild yells they rushed at the
German crew, and to their credit--if credit it be--let it be said that
these Huns did not cry "_Kamerad_!" They were ready for a fight and
they got it. It was a case of cold steel, and there were no better
exponents of that mode of fighting than the American lads.

There was a short and bloody conflict and then it was over. But at sad
cost to the attacking party. Of the sixteen that had started to wipe
out the machine-gun nest in the old red mill, the five Brothers alone
were left alive, and, save for slight flesh wounds, which all of them
had, they were not seriously injured. No, I am not quite correct in
saying that only these five were left alive. There was one other, a
lad named Blakeley from New Jersey. But he was so badly wounded, by
a bayonet thrust from a German, that his death was only a question of
minutes.

He managed, before he passed away, to whisper a message to his loved
ones at home, and this Jimmy Blaise undertook to send by letter.

"And now, let's see what's next to do," murmured Roger, when the dead
lad had been reverently laid with the other Americans killed in the
mill.

"I don't believe we're going to have much choice," said Jimmy, grimly,
as he pointed through the window.

"Why?" asked Roger.

"The Germans have surrounded the place," was the answer. "We're
trapped--that's why!"




CHAPTER X

FALLING WALLS


For a moment Jimmy's companions did not quite understand him. Was he
perpetrating some grim joke, or had he received an injury on the head
that made him irresponsible?

Suddenly the concussion of a heavy gun shook the mill, making the old
walls rattle and sending up little clouds of grain dust from nooks and
crannies where it had gathered for many peaceful years.

"The Germans have surrounded us?" cried Roger. "Do you mean that?"

"Look for yourself," said Jimmy, and his very calmness as he pointed
from the window seemed to indicate that he was master of himself.

His four companions looked as he indicated. Rolling down from the
hills, which surrounded the little valley in which the mill was
located, were ranks of gray-clad men; Huns beyond a doubt. And they
were coming in force.

"Do you suppose they are after us?" asked Bob, and he was quite
surprised when his four chums burst into laughter. No, I am wrong.
Only three of them laughed--Roger, Jimmy and Franz. Iggy looked on
almost as uncomprehendingly as did Bob, but Iggy was staring at a dead
German on the floor of the mill--a German he had killed by a bayonet
thrust from behind, when that same German was about to fire his
revolver, pointblank, at Roger. Iggy was filled with many emotions as
he looked at his work--work undertaken and carried out for Liberty.

"What's the matter?" asked Bob, a bit nettled. "Doesn't it look as
though they were after us?"

"I don't know why I laughed," confessed Jimmy. "Sort of nervous, I
guess. But the idea of a German army, or at least several divisions,
coming to capture us five struck me as funny."

"Well, you said we were being surrounded!" protested Bob.

"Well, I meant it, too. But in a general way," went on Jimmy. "I don't
suppose the Huns know we are here. Of course they may realize it after
they find out we've silenced the machine guns. But for the present
this seems to be a big advance. I guess there's going to be some
fierce fighting. They've brought up some of their reserves to stop our
progress, and by the fortunes of war, we're caught in a back current."

"You mean none of our fellows are here?" asked Roger.

"None that you can see," went on Jimmy. "I guess we sort of over-ran
our objective. There must have been a withdrawal and we didn't know
it.

"We were too intent on capturing this mill. And we did, though it
wasn't easy. And now the Germans are coming on, and--well, if we can
stay here long enough, and keep hidden, we may get out of it yet.
But--"

He shrugged his shoulders. It was too much of a question for him to
solve.

"But I don't see that we are completely surrounded," declared Franz,
hopefully, as he gazed from the window.

"Sure not!" broke in Iggy, who now began to comprehend, in a measure,
what was in the wind. "We may out run by der back door yet."

"Not a chance," declared Jimmy. "Look over there!"

He pointed in the direction where their own lines were supposed to be
located--where they probably were, for it was from there that the lads
had come in the rush during the gas attack. But now the way over
which they had hastened, amid fire and smoke and death and wounds, was
occupied by a line of gray. The Germans had slipped down from the left
flank and had cut off the retreat of the five Brothers in the mill.
And as the advancing army was coming on in the shape of a huge
semi-circle toward the mill it can easily be seen that if the boys
were not exactly surrounded it was so near that perilous situation as
to be what is called a distinction without a difference.

For a moment, after they had comprehended the situation to which Jimmy
had called their attention, they were all silent. Then Iggy caused
another laugh by remarking.

"Well, I eat me now. I haf some of my rations and I hear where is
water running yet. Always in our countries where is a mill is water.
Of a dryness I am, and water is good for of a dryness."

"That's the truest thing you've said in a long while!" cried Jimmy,
clapping his chum on the back. "Fellows, we'd better eat and drink
while we can. We have our emergency rations, and, as Iggy says, there
must be water where there's a mill. It isn't a wind one and there's no
steam or electricity here yet. Let's get ready for a siege."

"Do you really think they know we're here?" asked Bob, and he pointed
out toward the advancing German army.

"To be perfectly frank, I don't," said Jimmy. "I think the situation
is just this--but let's go get washed up a bit, and then we can eat
and talk. I'm as dry as a bone, and this--well this place isn't just
the most inviting," and he could not repress a shudder as he looked
at the death and devastation all about them. The bodies of the killed
Germans were sprawled in all positions, some even resting on the guns.
Then, too, there were bodies of the companions of the five Brothers.
As Jimmy said, it was no place to eat and talk.

They found where the mill stream came down the flume to turn the
wheel, and there they washed and drank, and then, finding a room where
the miller had evidently lived, they sat down to make what meal they
could. And as they ate the Germans advanced down the hills to occupy
the valley in which was located the old red mill.

"Now let's hear your opinion, Blazes," called Bob.

They all seemed instinctively to turn to Jimmy as a leader now. Nor
was this the first time.

"Well, I think we've seen the last of some Germans and the first of
others," he began.

"Sounds like a puzzle," commented Bob.

"It may turn out to be before we get through with it," was Jimmy's
grim reply. "But here's the situation as I see it. You know we
started, some days ago, to drive back the Huns. To a certain extent
we succeeded. Then came a lull, and that ended when they launched an
attack to-day--an attack with the gas as a preface.

"We did our best then, and I guess we must have rolled back part of
a wing of one of the German divisions. But our particular sector was
halted, and we seem to have gone on too far, or else the others got
orders to retreat, and we didn't, and here we are.

"Now I think the two German machine-gun crews that were in this mill
were probably what was left of the force our boys succeeded in wiping
out. They had orders to stay as long as possible to delay our advance,
and they stayed--got to give 'em that credit.

"But we just had to wipe 'em out, and we did. That's to our credit.
This seems to be the last of some not very large German force that
started the game this morning. And now comes a much larger force," and
he indicated the Hun hordes rolling down the slopes. "It was probably
the knowledge of the advance of this big body of troops that caused
the retreat, or halt, of our main force. We're probably waiting for
reserves, or we may be playing a deeper game--to get the Huns in this
valley and clean 'em up.

"That, of course, is up to the General Staff. But that doesn't change
our position. We're here, but I don't believe those Huns know it. The
army, or division, or whatever it is, that's coming on now may not
even know that this mill, for a time, was held by some of their
own men. Though, of course, later, when orders and instructions are
interchanged, this fact will come out.

"But before then I hope we'll either be out of here, or in a position
to give a better account of ourselves," went on Jimmy, who was sitting
on a box, munching part of his rations, and drinking from an old tin
cup he had found.

"What's that mean?" asked Franz.

"Well, either we can escape, or our boys will drive these Huns back,
and in that case we'll be all right. I admit it's going to be a
ticklish proposition to escape from here though," and Jimmy went to an
upper window and took another observation.

"Are they closing in?" asked Bob.

"They seem to have halted," replied Jimmy. "At least the center has.
The two wings are coming on like a pair of pliers getting ready to nip
us between the jaws."

"Ach! Den will dey squeeze us?" asked Iggy.

"If they know we are here I suppose they'll try it," declared Jimmy.
"But maybe we can inflict a few bites before they crush us! Fellows,
we'd better look to the defense. How much ammunition have we?"

"Mighty little!" declared Roger, gloomily. "I fired about all I had
coming on in the rush."

"Same here," admitted Bob.

"Maybe a machine-gun yet we could shoot," suggested Iggy. "One only
was bust by your grenade, Jimmy. Maybe one iss--"

"By Jove! He's right!" cried Jimmy. "I never thought of that. If worst
comes to worst we may, for a short time, turn the German's own gun on
'em. Come on and we'll take a look."

To the delight of the Khaki Boys the second machine-gun was in good
order, and there was considerable ammunition left.

"But can we work it?" asked Bob.

"Let me take a look," suggested Franz. "I saw something of 'em when
they had me a prisoner."

"Something good may come of that, after all," cried Jimmy. "Here you
go, Schnitz, take a look."

This Franz did, and presently reported that there was no reason why
they should not work the German gun. Accordingly it was freed from the
dead Huns about it, and the ammunition was overhauled. There was also
some ammunition for the German rifles that had fallen from the
dead hands of their owners, and this, together with the guns, was
collected.

In addition to this the lads had a few rounds left for their own
rifles, though, as Roger had said there was very little available.
They had fired fast and fiercely in the rush on the old mill.

"Let's look around and see if the Huns had any food they didn't
gobble," suggested Roger. "That ration of mine was only a sample."

A look from the mill windows showed that the advancing German army had
no present intentions, as far as could be judged, of attacking the red
mill. They did not seem to be paying any attention to it.

So far there had been a total absence of either artillery or rifle
fire. The advance had been made silently and comparatively quietly.
On either side of the mill, in the far distance, and to the rear,
however, were dull rumblings and booms that told of war's activities.

Greatly to their relief, the lads found quite a store of food the
Germans had put away, evidently in preparation for a long stay in
the mill. It was not food of the best quality, but it was better than
nothing, they all agreed. And there was water in plenty.

"If they come at us we'll fight as long as we can," decided Jimmy,
which was the sentiment of all, "and we'll live to the best of our
ability meanwhile."

"But they don't seem to be going to attack," ventured Roger. "They
look to me as though they were settling down for a long stay. I can't
see 'em digging trenches yet, but maybe there are some already dug."

While getting the food and ammunition in readiness, and dragging back
the dead bodies out of the way, the boys occasionally looked from the
mill windows. As Roger had said, the army appeared to have come to a
halt, both the center and the wings.

The Khaki Boys had just finished binding up their minor hurts, and
were talking of their chances for escape, when there suddenly sounded
outside a whine, a scream and a mingled roar.

The next instant there was an explosion that threw them all flat from
the force of the concussion, and a terrific noise deafened them. They
seemed to be at the ending of the career of this part of the old earth
as they saw the whole front wall of the red mill collapse, falling as
though sliced off by a gigantic cleaver.




CHAPTER XI

A STRANGE RESCUE


Stunned by the concussion, half choked by the clouds of dust and
smoke, terribly jarred when they had been felled by the force of the
explosion just outside the mill, our five heroes lay, for several
seconds, totally unable to stir. Had there been a rush of Huns on them
at that moment, or had some following explosion endangered the mill,
they would not have been able to move to save themselves.

But, for a time, there was no further explosion, so that the Khaki
Boys had a chance to recover their breath, and, what was more
important in their perilous situation, gather their no less scattered
wits.

"What--what in the name of the great Attila himself was that?" gasped
Roger.

"I think it was yet a gun what went off," mildly said Iggy.

"A gun? Say, it must have been the grandfather of all the cannon the
Huns ever made," declared Jimmy. "Are any of you alive?"

"Guess we're all alive," answered Bob, as he slowly arose and shook
some of the dust from him. For the dust was thick all over, in clouds
and scattered about. Some of it was flour dust and other was the lime
and mortar that had held together the front wall which had collapsed
and slid outward. The whole front of the mill was open.

There was no doubt about their all being alive, but, for a time, even
this had been in doubt. They were still stunned, but they managed to
gather in a knot about Jimmy. They were hardly able to breathe, partly
because of the shock and partly because of the choking dust.

"There goes our defense," said Bob, gloomily, pointing to where the
machine-gun stood--the one they had decided to use against their
enemies. It had been crushed by the falling wall.

"Lucky we had the rations in the back room," commented Roger, "Else
we'd go hungry."

"We may yet," returned Jimmy, grimly.

"What do you mean!" asked Bob, anxiously.

"Well, I don't believe that was a chance shot," went on the young
sergeant. "If they see the mill still standing they may try another,
and that may take off the roof. And then----"

"Whoa! Hold on a minute! A little at a time!" protested Bob. "This is
enough. Don't give us any more."

"We've got to know where we're at!" declared Jimmy, and there was a
new quality to his voice. "If this mill is within range of the German
guns, and, unquestionably, it is, we've got to get out."

"Or go down cellar," added Roger.

"I don't believe any cellar, unless it was double bomb proof, would be
safe if another shell like that came over," said Franz.

"Was it a German shell or one of ours?" asked Bob. "That would be
interesting to know. I don't suppose, though," he went on, "that it
really makes much difference, after you're dead, whether you're killed
by an enemy shell, or by one fired in mistake by one of your friends.
At the same time if the American guns have come up it may mean that
the Germans will have to retreat and we'll be safe."

"I wouldn't go so far as to say that," declared Jimmy. "It will mean
a big battle, anyhow, if the Americans and some of the French and
British have come up. And that may mean we'll have a chance to join
our friends. But, in the meantime, maybe we can tell whether that was
a Hun shell, sent to blow this mill off the earth, or whether it was
from the good old United States."

Cautiously they advanced across the floor, toward what had been the
front of the mill. Caution was necessary, for with the collapse of the
front wall and part of the sides, the floor supports were weakened.

"No telling where that shell landed," declared Bob. "It's buried deep,
and about ten tons of mortar and bricks are on top of it. If we had
seen it coming----"

"Look out--duck!" suddenly yelled Franz, as he grabbed Jimmy, who was
nearest him and darted toward the rear of the structure.

"What's the matter?" cried Bob.

"Another shell coming!" shouted Franz, and, even as he spoke there was
that horrid screeching sound. "Duck!"

Together they ran to the farthest corner of the old mill. Whether it
would have been better to have tried to get out none of them stopped
to think. They were in a panic.

And then came the explosion, but so distant that it caused no more
than a mere rumble of the ground, and a faintly-felt concussion of the
now tottery building.

"Missed us that time," declared Roger. "But they're getting our
range."

"No, they didn't fire at us," declared Franz. "If they had they would
have hit us, for undoubtedly the gunners know the effect of that first
shot. The Huns aren't shooting at us purposely."

"Do you mean that shell came from a German battery?" asked Bob.

"It did," affirmed Franz. "I saw the puff of smoke from a battery on
the hill where the Germans are grouped. Then I knew they were firing
in our direction. But of course I couldn't see the shell, and I didn't
know where it would land. But I didn't want to take a chance. That
either went over or fell short. But there's no question, now, as to
where the firing is coming from--it's from the German lines."

"Then there's no chance for us," said Roger, gloomily.

"Oh, I wouldn't say that," declared Franz. "They don't know we're
here, and they evidently aren't firing directly at this mill. They may
be using it to get the range, and that's why they dropped the first
shell here. But we still have a chance."

"I don't see it!" declared Bob. "We can't get out--surrounded as we
are by the enemy, and if we stay here another chance shell may wreck
the place."

"Better as we noathing do, maybe; eh?" suggested the Polish lad.

"I guess you've struck it," assented Jimmy. "There isn't very much we
can do. We might take a chance and sneak out, but I think very likely,
the Germans are well supplied with glasses. They are, most certainly,
watching this mill, if for no other reason than that it's so
conspicuous. If we run out they'll be sure to spot us, and it would
mean capture sure."

"Then what do you, advise, Blazes!" asked Roger.

"That we see if there's a chance of getting down in the cellar and
staying there. Some of these old mills had very thick foundation
walls. I don't know just how long this one will stand up if many more
such shells as the first one came over, but we can try it. In fact, it
seems to be our only chance."

"All right--to the cellar!" cried Bob. "And don't forget to take with
us what food and water we can. Maybe we'll be held there some time.
If there's a big battle it may last several days, though if our boys
drive back the Huns we'll take the opportunity to slip out and join
our friends."

"That's right," agreed Jimmy. "Just think, fellows, what's happening
to us now may have happened to poor Maxwell. Maybe that's why he
hasn't been heard from. If we don't come back they'll list us as
missing, and no one will know whether we've run away, been killed or
captured. So we'll have to suspend judgment on the man that's got our
thousand dollars."

"That's so," agreed Franz. "I never looked at it in just that way. We
never thought this would happen to us, any more than I thought I'd be
captured."

They were gathering up such food as remained to them, and Bob was
looking for something in which to carry some water to the cellar, when
there came again that nerve-racking screech, followed by a roar and
bang that seemed to knock the very bottom out of the world itself.

And this time the boys were conscious, for a brief instant at least,
that the old mill was gone. It seemed to fall apart, to disintegrate,
to crumble like some time-worn structure. And then all five of
the lads lost consciousness and seemed to be slipping down into
everlasting blackness, while all about them fell and rattled and
banged stones, bricks, mortar-dust and dirt, mingled with cracked and
splintered wood.

It was Iggy who first recovered his senses. Whether he was less
shocked, or whether his nerves were in such a state from his recent
experience as to make his unconsciousness of shorter duration,
does not matter. The fact is he opened his eyes. And he was at once
conscious that he was held down by the weight of much debris. It was
on his legs and on his body, but his arms and head were free.

"Ach! Back again am I in de shell hole! It was a dream, yes, that I
was taken out!" exclaimed the poor Polish lad. "It a dream must of
been! I shall sleep again!"

But as he was closing his eyes, for he really, as he said later,
thought that he was back in the shell hole, he saw Jimmy, who was half
buried near him, moving slightly.

"Oh, Jimmy Blazes! And dey kill you, too!" sighed Iggy. "How sorry I
am we both deat are alretty!"

"Who's dead?" asked Jimmy, in a faint voice. "I'm not, anyhow, but
blamed near it. Is that you, Iggy?"

"Yes, I it is. But I know not if I am deader or aliver."

"Take my word for it--you're alive so far, though how long you'll be
that way--or me, either--I can't say," said Jimmy. "What happened,
anyhow?"

To Iggy's relief Jimmy managed to scramble out of the pile of dirt
and stones that half buried him. And then, from another corner of what
seemed to be the cellar, a third voice said:

"They sent over a proper shell, that time." It was Franz.

"A _proper_ shell? Most _improper_, I call it!" came from Roger. "It
blew the mill to pieces!"

"And us along with it," added Bob. "Are we in the cellar?"

"Sub-cellar, basement--anything you like to call it!" put in Jimmy.
"But is it possible that none of us is seriously hurt?"

He walked over a pile of masonry and beams. He saw Bob crawling out
of a hole and Franz swinging himself down from what appeared to be a
ledge. Roger picked himself up from a corner. Only Iggy seemed to be
seriously hurt, but it was demonstrated, a few moments later, that
he was not. For he scrambled out, scattering the dust in a cloud, and
stood with his chums.

They were a sorry sight--covered with dust and streaks of blood, for
the wounds they had bound up had opened again, and they had many fresh
scratches and cuts.

"It's very evident what happened," declared Jimmy. "They must have
dropped a shell on the roof, and it blew the mill right down into
the ground, and us with it. We're in the cellar--or what was once the
cellar."

"And the next question is, how to get out," added Bob.

"Hark!" exclaimed Jimmy, holding up a warning hand.

There was silence, broken by a faint, crackling noise.

"Do you think you hear the German guns, or ours!" cried Bob.

"Neither one," said Jimmy, and there was a curious note in his voice.
"What I hear--and what you'll all hear, soon--is the crackling of
flames. The old mill--or what's left of it, boys--is on fire!"

"Then let's get out!" yelled Roger.

Jimmy looked about him, without moving. Above them there seemed to be
a solid mass of torn beams and jumbled masonry. On either side there
were stone walls--cracked walls, it is true, but, nevertheless, too
solid to admit the passage of the Khaki Boys. And only on one side
was there an opening, but this was so choked with debris as to make
it seemingly impossible to make egress that way. And, as the young
soldiers stood there, trapped under the collapsed mill, the sound of
the crackling flames became more plain. They could smell, now, the
smoke of burning wood.

"We've got to get out! We've got to get out!" yelled Bob.

He rushed to a place where, through a crisscross of beams and planks,
he could see daylight. Yet, though there were openings, none of them
was large enough to permit the passage of the smallest of the five
Brothers. And the wooden beams and planks were all of extraordinary
thickness.

"We're trapped! Trapped! And the fire coming nearer!" half sobbed Bob.

And then he saw through the crisscross of beams, coming toward the
burning mill, a man who seemed to be an American officer. And yet he
wore no such uniform as Bob had ever seen before.

"Steady, boys!" cried this strange rescuer, as he glimpsed them. "I'll
soon have you out! Wait! Don't bring the ruins down on top of you!"




CHAPTER XII

MUCH WONDERING


Through the splintered and tangled crisscross of beams, planks and
boards which barred their way to freedom, as some iron grill or
lattice work might have kept in some ancient prisoner, the Khaki Boys
looked at the man who had shouted to them; the man who had said he
would rescue them. And he spoke with a calmness and confidence that
was in strange contrast to the scene of terror, noise and confusion
which was behind the boys--a danger that was ever coming nearer as the
fire, started by the exploding shell, ate its way into the dry timber
of the old mill, and menaced the five imprisoned Brothers.

"Who is he?" murmured Bob.

"And where did he come from!" inquired Roger.

"Is he an American or German?" was the question Jimmy asked, and he
peered out through a space between two big beams that had fallen and
crossed when the mill collapsed.

"He isn't a German--that's sure," declared Franz. "No German would be
so decent as to rescue five imprisoned Americans. He'd let us roast to
death first."

"Maybe he knows not dat we American be," suggested the Polish lad.

"Well, he wouldn't have to be much of a guesser to tell that we
weren't Germans, after he heard us talk," said Jimmy. "We might be
of either nationality, as far as our being here is concerned. But no
matter what he thinks we are, he seems to be willing to help. What's
he looking for, I wonder?"

The strange rescuer appeared to be looking about in front of the mill
for some object. His eyes eagerly sought the ground, and he hurried to
and fro, seeming to realize the need of haste.

"I'll be there in just a moment, boys!" he called. "I'm looking for
something to use in prying apart those beams. They're pretty heavy,
and I've got to work all alone. I'll get you out in time!"

"Wonder how he knows we're boys!" asked Bob.

"Oh, that's a general term--he'd call us that if we were forty years
old," declared Jimmy. "And no matter how old a man is, if he's in the
army, he's a boy. But I wish he'd hurry. It's getting hot here!"

It certainly was! The fire was gaining rapidly, and, every now and
then, with a shift in the wind, the hot, choking gases from the
flames, together with rolling clouds of smoke, would be blown into the
rude chamber where the boys were imprisoned.

When the smoke-clouds blew away the Khaki Boys could look out and see
their rescuer, still hunting frantically about for some object to use
as a lever. In spite of the danger of their situation they could not
help observing the man. He was tall, and well formed, and unmistakably
a military character. He appeared to be above the general type of
captain or lieutenant.

"If he's any less than a general I'll eat my gas mask!" Roger declared
afterward.

Clearly the man was born to command, or he had acquired that right in
some manner. There was an indefinable air of authority about him, even
though now he was hurrying about almost frantically, looking for some
weapon with which to attack the barrier that held the boys prisoners.

"That sure is a queer uniform he has on," remarked Jimmy, as he tried
in vain to move some of the beams from his side of the mass of timber
that had fallen when the mill was blown up. "It's mostly American, but
it has a British air about it."

"And his leather puttees look like some the Germans wear," added Bob.
"Maybe he's a war correspondent, and had to pick up bits of uniform
from all over."

"He isn't a war correspondent," declared Jimmy.

"What makes you so sure?" Roger wanted to know.

"Because, if he was, he'd have a brassard with a large letter 'C'
on it, around his arm," went on Jimmy. "And he wouldn't have a big
automatic revolver strapped to his hip, either. The correspondents
are classed as non-combatants, and aren't allowed to go armed."

"That's right," chimed in Franz. "But who is he!"

It seemed useless to speculate then, and, indeed, the boys were in
little mood for it. The precariousness of their position was alarming.
And while I have detailed the conversation among them, you are to
understand that it all took place very quickly. In fact from the time
they first observed the strange rescuer, until they had talked about
his odd uniform, was only about half a minute.

Suddenly the man--officer let us call him--who was scurrying about
just beyond the jagged barrier, uttered a cry of satisfaction. He
hurried out of the boys' vision for a moment, but lest they have
any fear that he had deserted them and left them to their fates, he
called:

"I've found what I've been looking for--an axe! I'll soon have you out
now!"

He came running back, carrying an axe of curious make. It was a large,
keen one, however, and later it developed that it was one the French
miller had used to chop his firewood. Throwing off his coat, and
revealing beneath it a dark blue shirt, the officer began fiercely
to chop at the beams.

And the boys remembered afterward, though at the time they were too
excited to mark it, that the officer picked out what might be called
the "key" beam. That is one which held all the other pieces of jigged
and splintered timber in place, making a prison of that part of the
cellar.

With vigorous blows of the keen implement, the unknown chopped away at
a great hand-hewn beam. And he swung the axe as though he knew how to
use it, and not as a tyro.

"He's been in a lumber camp at one time of his life," decided Jimmy,
and the others were inclined to agree with him.

The fire was now gaining so rapidly that the heat of it, penetrating
to the prison of the boys, was almost unbearable. The smoke, too, made
their eyes smart and burn, and it choked them, causing them to gasp
and cough.

"Steady, boys! Steady!" panted the officer, between his vigorous
blows. "A few more strokes and I'll have this beam cut. Then I think
you can get out."

Again and again he swung the keen axe. Between the blows the boys
could hear the sounds of distant firing, and the reverberation told
them that heavy guns were being used.

"Hope they don't send any more shells over this way," murmured Bob.

"They seem satisfied, now that they have brought down the old mill on
top of us," commented Franz. "Can any of you see the German lines!"

None of them could, it developed. In fact, their vision was obstructed
by a small hill directly in front of the grill work of their prison,
and, even if this had been removed, the smoke was now swirling around
them so thickly that, at times, even the officer chopping them out was
obscured.

Once or twice the chopper had to stoop down, in order to breathe the
purer and cooler air near the ground, and the boys were put to the
same expedient.

And then, suddenly, there came a crashing, splintering sound. There
was an exclamation from the officer, and, as he leaped back he cried:

"There she goes, boys! The way is as clear as I can make it! Come on
out, and lively, too!"

The Khaki Boys lost no time in obeying. Leaping and scrambling as best
they could over the heaps of brick, stone and splintered wood, they
emerged through the hole cut for them by the officer. He had chopped
through the one beam that held all the others, or most of the others
in place, and the crisscross structure had collapsed, allowing the
boys to escape.

"Come on! Come on!" cried Jimmy. "Everybody out!"

And they leaped out only just in time, for as Bob, the last to make
his way to safety, cleared the jagged barrier, a burst of flames and
smoke swept into what had been the boys' prison.

Now they stood on the green grass, in the open, with the burning ruins
of the mill at their backs. And confronting them, still holding the
axe, and panting from his terrific exertions, was the strange officer.

And as the young soldiers looked at him they wondered, more than ever,
who he was.




CHAPTER XIII

A PERILOUS JOURNEY


Almost at once there set in a reaction, as was natural under the
circumstances. The Khaki Boys had been keyed up to such a high pitch
through the battle, the attack on the hill, the subsequent shelling
of it, and their own dangerous position after the collapse of the
building, that now their rescue hardly seemed real.

"Say, I'm about all in!" exclaimed Bob, as he sank down on the grass.

"Same here," agreed Jimmy, staggering to a seat.

"Take it easy, boys, take it easy," counseled their rescuer. "And
better come a bit farther away from the fire. The whole place is
going, and the wind's blowing strongly this way. We're too much in
line with it."

He spoke the truth. The boys were enveloped, part of the time, in a
haze of smoke and a swirl of burning brands. Tired, and physically
and mentally exhausted as they were, they scrambled to their feet--for
they had all stretched out on the grass--and made their way to a spot
where they could breathe with freedom. The mill ruins were now burning
fiercely.

"Any more left in there!" asked the officer, pointing with his axe
towards the fiery structure.

"None alive," answered Jimmy, as he thought of their brave comrades
in arms who had perished in wiping out the German machine-gun nest. It
was, perhaps, a fitting funeral pyre for them.

"Stay here and I'll get you some water," offered the blue-shirted
officer. "That will fetch you around quicker than anything else. I can
get you a little food, too, I think--emergency rations, if you need
them."

"We aren't exactly hungry, sir," said Jimmy, tacking on the "sir" in
an almost certain opinion that the man was an officer. "We had some
of our own rations, and we were eating when the Huns sent a big shell
over that spilled the beans."

"I see. Well, then, rest here until I can get you some water.
Fortunately the Boches can't blow up a stream. The water is sure to
remain somewhere. It won't take long to get it, I'll be back in a
moment."

He hurried off between two little hillocks, away from the burning mill
and in the direction of the stream.

"Who in the world is he?" asked Bob.

"It's a puzzle," said Jimmy. "We'll ask when we thank him for saving
our lives."

"Here you are, boys," said the officer, as he came up the slope with a
canteen which gurgled most musically with water. "Drink this and then
we'll discuss what's best to be done."

"Are we safe here?" asked Jimmy. "Safe from the Germans, I mean?
They're all about here, you know."

"Yes, I know," said the officer, and there seemed to be more in his
remark than the mere words indicated. "But you're safe for the time
being. They have destroyed the mill, so it is no longer a menace, they
fancy. Their guns are directed elsewhere now."

The sound of distant firing could be plainly heard, but the boys could
no longer observe the gray ranks of the Huns on the distant hill. One
reason for this was because of the smoke from the burning mill, which
swirled about in all directions, and the other reason was that there
was a lot of smoke caused by the guns of the Germans, and this, or
perhaps a smoke screen which they started, concealed them.

"Feel better?" asked the officer, when the lads had emptied the
canteen.

"Much," answered Jimmy. "And now, sir, may we have the pleasure of
knowing to whom we owe our escape? We're from the 509th Infantry," he
went on. "We were in the battle, and got cut off. Our lieutenant had
ordered us to take the mill where some Germans had two machine-guns.
We five are all that are left of the sixteen that started. And we
wouldn't be alive but for you. So if we could know whom to thank--"

The officer stopped him with an imperious gesture. He looked rather
stern, and then, as though conscious that this was not the attitude to
take, he smiled.

"I'm glad I was able to serve you," he said. "I happened to be in the
neighborhood. I heard your cries after the mill collapsed and began to
burn, and I hastened up. I had no time to summon help--in fact, your
friends are rather distant from here now. The Germans are all about."

"We know it--to our sorrow," replied Bob. "How we are going to get
back to our company is what's worrying me."

"It _is_ going to be a problem," assented the officer.

"Are you coming with us?" asked Jimmy. It was a perfectly
natural question. Here was one--by most appearances an American
officer--marooned with some American doughboys in the midst of the
Germans. Why should he not cast his lot with them, and lead them to
the best of his ability to the safest place? He was an officer--there
was no question of that--and it was his right to lead. But he seemed
disturbed at Jimmy's question. He looked searchingly at the boys, and
then toward the distant hills where the Germans were massed, though
not then in sight.

"No, I--I can't come with you," the unknown said. "I'm sorry, but you
will have to shift for yourselves. I'll give you the best directions
I can to enable you to reach your own lines, but you'll have to go
alone."

"We'll try," said Bob. "But we wish to thank you, and we don't know--"

"Oh, it was all in the day's work," interrupted the officer, "Any one
who came along would have done just as I did to help you."

"Not anyone, sir," asserted Franz, in a low voice. "A German wouldn't
have chopped us out."

"Well--er--perhaps not," said the officer. "But it was in my line of
duty and I did it. I don't want to be thanked for doing my duty."

"But we insist on thanking you, sir!" exclaimed Jimmy with a
smile. "If it hadn't been for you we'd be dead in there now--it was
impossible for us to free ourselves!"

"Well, you may call me Captain Frank Dickerson," said the officer
slowly. And he appeared to hesitate over the words.

"Then allow me, in the names of my companions, to thank you from the
bottoms of our hearts!" exclaimed Jimmy, rising and saluting. The
captain returned the salute. He stood for a minute looking Jimmy
straight in the eyes, and the lad said afterward that the officer
seemed to be searching out the sergeant's very soul. Then Captain
Dickerson said:

"I must leave you now. You will find a little package of food at the
end of the mill flume. I'll leave you this canteen so you may carry
water with you on your journey toward your own lines. Your way lies
there," and he pointed to the south. "Good-bye--and good luck! I hope
you may get through, but--"

Then, turning abruptly he strode off between two high grassy hummocks,
and was soon lost to sight in the smoke and haze.

For a moment the khaki boys stood, motionless, and then Jimmy, looking
around on the circle of his companions, exclaimed:

"Well, if that isn't mysterious!"

"I should say so!" agreed Bob. "Talk about the man in the iron
mask--this beats it!"

"Why doesn't he come with us, toward the American lines?" asked Roger.
"Why does he want to go over where the Huns are? This gets me. It
looks as if he was----"

He did not finish the sentence. But his chums knew what he had started
to say. Only it seemed a terrible suspicion to which to give voice,
against the man who had saved their lives. Still, with all that, the
khaki boys could not help thinking in their hearts that there was
something wrong.

"Maybe he's going over there to scout around and see if that's a
better way for us to get back to our quarters," suggested Bob.

Jimmy shook his head. Then he remarked slowly:

"Come on! Let's see about food and water and then well hike. All our
stuff--guns, rations and everything--has gone up in the fire."

"I haf yet two off dem handle chranades," spoke up Iggy, meaning,
thereby the serrated Mills bombs which were used in the trench raids.

"Hold on to them!" advised Jimmy. "We'll need them if the Huns see us,
and they're very likely to."

They crawled to the end of the mill flume. The fire was now some
distance from this wooden water carrier. There, in a canvas bag which
the boys recognized as one of the variety carried by the Americans,
they found a goodly stock of provisions.

"They'll last us a day, anyhow," said Jimmy, making an inspection.
"And by that time we may be back in our lines."

"Or in the Germans'," voiced Bob.

"There's a big battle going on all around us, but we seem to be in the
center of a calm area," said Roger. "The question is how to find our
way out."

"Well, let's go!" suddenly exclaimed Jimmy. "Well only get lame and
stiff staying here, I feel as if I'd been rolled down hill in a spiked
barrel."

Not one of the five Brothers but what had several wounds. But,
fortunately, they were superficial ones. They were sore and bruised
from being knocked down by the concussion, and by being precipitated
into the cellar by the collapse of the mill. But they were still able
to travel; though, as Jimmy said, if they remained inactive their
muscles and joints would stiffen.

"Hike!" cried Bob, and they set off in the direction indicated
by Captain Dickerson--that strange man who had seemed so cold and
reserved, and who had made so light of what he had done in saving the
lives of the Khaki Boys.

"I wonder if we'll ever see him again," mused Franz, as they marched
away from the burning mill.

"Somehow I have a feeling that we will," said Jimmy. And afterward he
was to recall those words under strange circumstances.

And so they began what was destined to be a most perilous journey to
get back to their own lines.




CHAPTER XIV

THE SENTRY


"Now, boys," said Sergeant Jimmy, when they had dipped down into a
hollow among the many hills in the big valley, "we've got to have some
plan of action, and some system to this. We've got to have a leader,
too. Military rule must prevail, even among friends."

"You act as leader!" suggested Bob Dalton.

"That's right!" chimed in all the others.

"We'll make you captain, for the time being," added Roger.

"Thank you for the honor," said Jimmy with a smile. "I'll wait, I
guess, until my promotion comes regularly. But if you really want me
to take the lead and--"

"Of course we want you!" exclaimed Franz, while Iggy added:

"Besser as we should have him for to leader us dan a Germans."

"Well, I'm glad you think that much of me!" laughed Jimmy. "Now then,
if I'm to lead I'll have to give orders. And do you all agree to obey
them--at least if they don't seem against your better judgment?"

"We'll obey 'em anyhow," said Roger, and the others nodded assent.

"All right," went on Jimmy. "The first thing to do is to calculate how
long our rations will last. There's enough for one day if we each took
about all we wanted. Or there's enough for two days, or more, if we
stint ourselves."

"Then we'll go on a diet!" declared Bob. "There's no telling how long
we may be in getting back to our lines, and while we might be able to
find something to eat along the way, it won't do to take chances."

"I thought you'd look at it that way," said Jimmy. "As for water, it
rains so infernally often in this country that I imagine we shan't
be thirsty. But we'll always carry the canteen full. Now, then, I'll
appoint Roger as Secretary of the Interior--that is, I'll make him the
cook and give him charge of the rations," and Jimmy handed the canvas
bag of food over to his chum.

"There isn't anything to cook," said Roger, as he looked in the bag.
"It's all emergency ration stuff."

"So much the easier for you," declared Jimmy. "Now that's settled, the
next thing to decide is how to get to our lines."

"Keep right on going the way Captain Dickerson told us," suggested
Bob.

"That's what I want to consider," Jimmy went on. "Do you all think
that is the wisest course to follow?"

"Why in the world not?" asked Franz, in some amazement. "Didn't
he tell us to go south, and don't we pretty well know that in that
direction would be the most logical place for our troops to be?"

"I grant that," replied Jimmy. "But if our lines are to the south, why
did Captain Dickerson, who appears to be an American officer, go to
the north! Why didn't he come with us?"

"That's starting the whole question over again," declared Bob. "I say
let's take a chance and go south. The captain wouldn't send us wrong
after he went to all that trouble to save us alive."

"Perhaps you're right," admitted Jimmy. "Well, though I'm leader I'm
willing to abide by the majority rule. Since you all want to go to the
south, the south it shall be."

"Don't you think that's the best way?" asked Roger.

"Well, it's as good, perhaps, as any other," was the reply. "I think
we're pretty well surrounded by Germans, and it doesn't really make
much difference which way we go. So the south is as good as any."

"Then lead on!" exclaimed Bob.

"Yes--hike!" added Roger.

And once more they started off.

Their way lay through what had once been a beautiful farming country.
In places, still, there were fields under cultivation--that is, they
had been cultivated up to within a few weeks. But the tide of battle
had swept over the region and the French farmers had either been killed
or had left their homesteads. Still, where the fields had not been torn
up by shell fire, grains were growing, and there were even orchards here
and there.

But, as far as the soldier boys could see, there was no sign of life.
Even the birds seemed to have flown away. There were no chickens, no
dogs, no cattle nor horses--in fact none of the usual farm scenes.
Here and there were farmhouses, some in ruins, others scarcely touched
by the devastating wave of war. But in these latter, which were still
habitable, there were no men or women, and no laughing children. In
fact, throughout France it is probable that there were no laughing
children at this stage of the war. Or if they laughed, it was because
they were too young to appreciate the menace of the Boche invasion.

"We may not be so badly off for food, even if we eat up all our
Secretary of the Interior has," remarked Bob, as they trudged along a
deserted road. They had, some time since, left behind them the burning
mill. It was out of sight, though they could catch occasional glimpses
of the smoke from it.

"What do you mean!" asked Jimmy.

"Well, there may be a lot of good things to eat in some of these
farmhouses," suggested the young corporal. "I vote we take a look."

"It can't do any harm," decided Jimmy. "But I doubt if we find
anything worth taking."

And he was right--at least in the first few houses the boys entered.
The cupboards had been cleaned out, if not by the unfortunate owners,
then by the Germans who had devastated the region.

"We'll have to live on what we have," said Jimmy. "And we may not be
so badly off for all that Lots of the boys have been without food
for three days. If they stood it we can. And we may get to our lines
sooner than we expect."

"I don't see why we shouldn't get there by night," observed Roger. "We
didn't hike very far when we were fighting, and our boys can't have
retreated far enough in the time that has elapsed since the fighting
changed, to get entirely beyond our reach. I believe we'll be with our
own division by night."

"Well, it doesn't do any harm to hope," said Jimmy. "But we've got to
be cautious just the same."

They kept on, ever on the alert for a sight of the Germans, ever
hoping for a sight of their own khaki-clad comrades. They appeared to
be marching away from the scene of the battle, or battles. The firing
became fainter. The country was now quite open, consisting of little
hills and valleys. Each time they came to a height which afforded
a place for observation, they looked all around. But all they saw,
besides an occasional deserted farmhouse, or patch of woods, were
rolling clouds of mist or smoke.

There had been considerable rain, and the ground was damp. The sun,
shining on this, caused the moisture to condense into fog that swirled
about here and there. The day had begun wonderfully clear, but now it
looked like rain again.

They halted in a little grove of trees and ate some of their
none-too-plentiful rations. Then, after a rest, they started on again.
It was late afternoon when, as they were hiking down a lonely road,
the rain suddenly began to fall.

"Whew! Now we're in for it!" exclaimed Roger, as he did his best to
protect the bag of food. "We might better have stayed back in the
woods."

"Let's double-quick it!" suggested Bob. "Maybe there's a house around
the bend in the road."

They hastened on, and the surmise of Bob proved correct. There was a
lonely little house--more of a cabin, or shack--set in the midst of
what had been a garden, but now overgrown with weeds.

"Shelter, at any rate!" cried Jimmy. "Come on, fellows!"

Roger was the first to enter the humble little cottage. But he had no
sooner crossed the threshold than he started back.

"What's the matter?" asked Bob, who was directly behind his chum. "Any
Germans here?"

"No, but I fancy the owner is," said Roger. "Look!"

He pointed to the figure of an old man, with white hair, seated at a
table in what was evidently the kitchen. The man's head was bowed on
his arms which were resting on the table.

"Oh!" exclaimed Jimmy, as he looked in.

"Beg your pardon, sir," said Bob, "but we're Americans. May we stay
here out of the rain, and perhaps for the night?"

There was no answer. The figure did not move.

"He doesn't understand anything but French, very likely," said Franz.
"Can't you take a hand, Blazes?"

"Yes," assented Jimmy. "But it's funny he didn't wake up when Bob
spoke, even if he didn't understand. I'll go ahead. But let's get in
out of the wet."

They entered the room. The white-haired occupant of it did not stir
from his position of bowed-down grief.

"He sleeps very soundly," remarked Jimmy in a low voice.

Stepping forward he touched the old man on the shoulder, and then
Jimmy knew what had happened.

"He's dead!" he whispered.

"Dead?" echoed the others.

"Come on--let's go into the other room," suggested Jimmy.

There was another room opening out from the kitchen. Into this the
Khaki Boys filed silently.

"Do you suppose the Germans killed him?" asked Roger.

"Very likely. Or he may have died from old age, fright or shock. We'll
leave him where he is."

"And stay here?" asked Bob.

"Sure! Why not? We're out of the rain. The poor dead man can not harm
us, and we have seen enough of death, in worse forms than this, to be
afraid now."

"Oh, it isn't that I'm afraid!" exclaimed Bob. "But if the Germans did
that to--him--they may come back and--"

"I fancy not," said Jimmy. "I believe they think they have cleaned out
this place. It's the safest spot for us with the old man as a silent
sentry. Come, fellows, well spend the night here with the dead to
guard us."

It was said reverently--piously--and there was a strange feeling in
the hearts of all the boys as they closed the door on the silent,
pathetic figure and stood together in the other room, while the rain
beat down on the roof, and dashed against the windows.

And so they began their bivouac of the with death as a sentry on
guard.




CHAPTER XV

IN THE BATTLE AGAIN


"Well, we've got to be thankful that we had a place to stay all night
where we were out of the wet," remarked Jimmy, as he and his chums
awoke the next morning in the lonely cottage of the dead Frenchman.

"Yes, and we're going to have a good day to travel, too," said Bob.
"There's the sun up good and proper, as Tommy Atkins would say."

"No telling how long it'll stay up," came from Roger. "Yesterday
started in fine, but look what happened before night."

"Look what happened!" echoed Jimmy. "I don't believe since we joined
the service any more things have happened in any one day. We ought to
be thankful we're alive."

"Sure we are," said Iggy. "But I thinks me dat he is going to rain!"

"Who's he?" asked Franz.

"Him!" and Iggy pointed to the sun. "Der wedder I mean. Him will rain
before night I feel, for of my foot there is such a pains. Always when
it rain going to be is, of my foots there is a pain."

"You mean your corn hurts!" asked Bob, with a laugh. He had been
rather gloomy the day before, but now he seemed to have recovered his
usual good spirits. "Imagine having a corn in these days of battle!"
he went on.

"He is not what you say--imagitive!" declared the Polish lad
earnestly. "He is real, dat pain in mine foots! But I can away from
here march quick. It gives me bad dreams," and he looked toward the
kitchen where the silent occupant had acted as sentry for them.

There had been no disturbance during the night, and if any parties of
Germans had passed the lonely farmhouse this was unknown to the boys.
Occasionally they heard the sound of distant firing, but now, as
the sun rose higher in the heavens, the noises became louder, and,
seemingly, nearer.

"Must be a big battle going on not far from here," remarked Bob.

"I don't believe there's been any let-up in the big battle," came from
Jimmy.

"The only trouble is that we're being left out!" exclaimed Franz. "I
want to get back in the fighting again."

"Same here!" murmured Roger. "Let's eat and then well hike. We ought
to get back to our lines to-day, sure."

"If we have luck," remarked Jimmy. "Well, let's go!"

It was not much of a breakfast that the Khaki Boys had, but it was
better than nothing. They managed to make a fire in the stove and
boiled some coffee they found in a cupboard.

"Best meal I've had in a week!" exclaimed Bob with a grateful sigh, as
he finished his cup of hot liquid. "Now I'm ready to meet Kaiser Bill
himself!"

They packed up what food remained, filled their canteen from a little
stream not far from the cottage, and then, bidding a silent farewell
to the dead Frenchman, they started off once more.

The country through which the five Brothers traveled seemed as
deserted as that over which they had journeyed the previous day after
their rescue from the old mill. But the evidences of war were more
frequent in destroyed orchards, ruined farmhouses and, here and
there, immense holes in the ground where great shells had struck and
exploded.

"What's your trouble, Jimmy!" asked Bob, clapping his chum on the
shoulder, as they trudged down a road. "You look as though you hadn't
heard from your girl in Buffalo in a month of Sundays."

"Neither I have," said Jimmy. "But I wasn't exactly thinking of
Margaret then, though I have given her a lot of thought at different
times. I'm just wondering--"

"'Pack up your troubles in your old kit bag, and smile, smile,
smile!'" sang Bob.

"Good advice," commented Jimmy. "My troubles aren't any more serious
than those of anyone else in this war. But I was just wondering if
that officer told us the truth"

"What officer?" asked Roger.

"The one who called himself Captain Dickerson, and who saved our lives
at the red mill?" answered Jimmy. "I can't get over his not coming
with us to show us the way to the American lines. I believe he ought
to have done it!" and Jimmy spoke very determinedly.

"He certainly would have if he had had any consideration for
Iggy's pet corn!" laughed Bob. "We don't seem to be having any luck
ourselves. It wouldn't have hurt him to have taken command of this
squad of rookies and led us back to civilization."

"Civilization! I hope you don't call the trenches with their big rats
and cooties and--er--other things--civilization!" cried Jimmy. "If it
is--give me barbarism."

"Well, I didn't just mean that," went on Bob. "But I wish Captain
Dickerson had come back with us."

"Maybe he had orders to proceed elsewhere," suggested Franz.

"If he had he was on a dangerous mission," said Jimmy simply. "He went
straight toward the German lines. I can't understand it at all. He
certainly was a strange man."

"But he did us the greatest service one man can do for another,"
remarked Roger. "He saved our lives, fellows! Don't forget that!"

"No," agreed Jimmy in a low voice. "Whatever happens we must never
forget that."

They trudged on in silence a little longer, and then Franz broke out
with:

"And speaking of wondering, Jimmy, what do you suppose has become of
Sergeant Maxwell?"

"And your money, Blazes," added Bob.

"Our money," corrected his chum. "Haven't I told you that the five
thousand francs is the joint property of the five Brothers."

"All right--have it your own way--anything if or a quiet life!" said
Bob, quickly. "I was just wondering, that's all."

"I have been wondering, too," admitted Jimmy. "The disappearance of
Maxwell and the cash is almost as much of a mystery as is Captain
Frank Dickerson."

Twice that day, as they tramped along, seeking in vain for the
American lines, they saw small parties of German soldiers. And on
both occasions the Khaki Boys were fortunate enough to sight the enemy
first, so they could conceal themselves in patches of woods.

They were now in a country where there were larger tracts of forest,
and after coming out of one of these thickets Bob remarked.

"Fellows, do you know what I think?"

"Do you, really?" chafed Roger.

"Do I really what?" asked Bob, a bit disconcerted.

"Think!" exclaimed his chum. "I thought you'd given that up."

"This war is enough to make a chap give it up," Bob agreed. "But
seriously, fellows, I think we're lost--that we've been going around
in a circle, and we aren't any nearer our lines than when we were at
the red mill. Not so near, in fact, for there we knew that some of the
doughboys were not more than a mile away. But here--"

"Bob, I shouldn't be surprised but what you are right!" exclaimed
Jimmy. "It does seem funny that, with all our traveling, we haven't
come to the American lines. They can't be so far away as all this. I
guess we must have traveled in a circle. Pity we haven't a compass."

"Can't you steer by the sun?" asked Franz. "We started south, and if
we keep the rising sun on our left and the setting sun on our right,
we're bound to go south."

"The trouble was yesterday that we didn't see the sun after we started
hiking," declared Jimmy. "It's all right now--we're surely going
south. But how long we can keep it up there's no telling."

"Well, then, as long as we know we're going in the right direction
now, let's double quick and cover as much ground as we can straight
away, before we get turned around again," suggested Roger.

His plan was voted a good one, and the tired young soldiers hurried
on. But to their chagrin it soon became cloudy, and then a mist
settled down obscuring every gleam of sunshine, and they had to
depend on their sense of direction, which, truth to tell, was not very
accurate.

When night came, it found the boys on a lonely stretch of land, partly
bogs, with, here and there, patches of woods. The prospect was most
gloomy, for their food was getting scarce, and they were tired and.
sore. Their wounds, slight as they were, bothered them, and though
none complained, each one would have been glad to be able to slip into
some dugout, no matter how rough, and there rest.

"What shall we do!" asked Jimmy, as it became almost too dark to
proceed along an uncertain path. "Shall we hole in or keep on?"

"It's going to be cold, holing in this night," replied Roger, with a
shiver. "Look at that fog!" he went on, as the mists rolled up from a
swamp. "It goes right through you!"

"Well, then let's keep on walking," said Jimmy, trying to speak
cheerily.

They walked on in silence. Bob did not get off any of his queer,
improvised rhymes, and as for Iggy he turned up the collar of his
coat, hunched his shoulders; and seemed like some old man tramping
along.

"Hark!" suddenly called Jimmy, and the words came in a tense whisper.
It was as if he had said "Halt!" for his chums came to a stop on the
instant.

"What is it?" asked Bob.

"Don't you hear some one walking toward us?" went on Jimmy, his voice
still low and tense.

They all listened. The fog swirled around them in cold, white clouds.
And then, through the darkness, they all heard, and distinctly, this
time, the measured beat of marching feet.

"Soldiers all right!" commented Roger in a whisper.

"Yes, but what kind?" was Jimmy's question. "Are they our boys, some
of the Allies or--Germans?"

"What shall we do?" asked Franz, and, in the misty darkness he turned
toward Jimmy, as seemed natural.

"Keep still," was the advice given. "And crouch down. If they are
Boches well let 'em pass--if they'll be so obliging as to go on. If
they're some of our boys--"

"Oh, boy! If they only are!" sighed Bob.

The tramping feet came nearer.

"They're headed right this way!" declared Franz, who was crouching
down next to Jimmy.

"Yes. But keep still! Don't even whisper. Sounds carry very far on a
misty night--almost as they do over water."

The thud of heavily shod feet sounded plainly now, and then, suddenly,
so suddenly that it made the hearts of the Khaki Boys thump fiercely,
there came a voice out of the darkness saying:

"I don't believe we'd better go any farther, boys. We've come quite a
way from our lines, and we haven't seen a sign of even a Hun sentry.
We can go back and report the coast clear!"

And the voice was that of an American! Hearing it Jimmy and his chums
leaped to their feet.

"Americans there"! sung out Bob.

Instantly came the sharp challenge:

"Who's there!"

"Some of the 509th Infantry," answered Jimmy, giving the names of his
companions and himself.

"Advance, Sergeant Blaise! The others stay where they are. And
remember our rifles have you covered, so don't try any funny work."

It was a grim warning, but the five Brothers appreciated its need.
Jimmy stepped forward, and the light from a pocket electric torch
flashed in his face.

"Don't know you, but you look all right," said a tall, young
lieutenant who was in charge of the party, the tramping feet of which
had so alarmed our heroes. "What are you doing here?"

"It's a long story, but I'll cut it short," said Jimmy, and he did.
The lieutenant listened with interest, and then, satisfied that the
truth was being told, he remarked.

"You'd better come back with us. We'll take care of you for to-night,
and to-morrow you can send word to your command. I don't know this
Captain Dickerson you speak of."

"Are we near the American lines?" asked Bob.

"Within half a mile," was the answer.

They were led back, and soon were comfortably housed in a dugout,
partaking of hot rations, and telling their story to wondering
comrades. They had come upon a sector of the line held by a division
made up of New York and New Jersey troops, and, though our heroes knew
none of them personally, they fraternized all right.

The next day the commanding officer, having heard their story, sent
them back to their own company, which had moved considerably farther
toward the front since the battle of the mill, as the boys called it.

They learned that the big body of German troops which they had seen
from their hiding place had not yet come into an engagement to any
great extent with the Allies.

"A big battle is pending though," said their captain, when our heroes
were back in their own command, where they were made royally welcome.
"There have been skirmishes and some long-distance artillery work. But
the big fight is yet to come. You'll have a chance to rest up and get
in trim for it."

Jimmy and his chums were glad of this. They were allowed leaves of
absence, and went back of the lines to a pleasant little village,
where rest and good food soon made them "fit" again. All efforts to
learn something more of Captain Dickerson, and the whereabouts of
Sergeant Maxwell, were, however, without avail.

One evening, after the five Brothers had reported back to their billet
for duty, and while they were in the dugout, detailing over again some
of their experiences at the mill, the sergeant-major entered.

"Get set, boys!" he exclaimed. "The orders are coming in. We go over
the top again in the morning, and it's going to be some fight!"

And when the zero hour was signaled again the five Brothers were in
battle once more.




CHAPTER XVI

HELD UP


Equipped with gas masks, their packs filled with first-aid outfits,
carrying emergency rations, with the "tin hats" on their heads and
with rifles firmly grasped, over the top went the Khaki Boys, and
thousands like them, in another attempt to subdue the Boche enemy.

Behind the boys roared out the big guns that were laying down a
protecting barrage--a veritable curtain of fire behind which they
might advance and without which they would have been swept back into
their trenches broken and bruised and killed. The artillery duel had
been under way some little time now, and it had evidently taken the
Germans by surprise, for they were longer than usual in replying.

"Smash 'em up! Smash 'em up!" yelled the lieutenant in charge of that
particular part of the advance in which Jimmy Blaise and his chums
were included. "Smash 'em up, boys!"

"Wow! We're with you!" howled Franz. "Smash 'em up!"

Forward they surged, the gallant American lads, who a short time
before were peaceful clerks, factory and farm hands and happy college
lads, and some boys who instinctively shrank from the mere thought of
killing. But now their spirits were on fire with the sacred wine of
liberty, and they were daring as they had never dared before. Their
daring was imbued with right, and other than this nothing will stand.

The gray mists of morning swirled this way and that, blown not so much
by nature's wind as by the bursts from the flaming mouths of great guns.
And through this mist rushed the Americans, some to horrible death or
agony, and some to escape scatheless--to inflict just punishment on a
mass of men who had lost all sense of right and wrong--men who had
reverted to beasts.

"Are we all here?" yelled Jimmy, above the horrid din of battle, as he
tried to see if Bob, Roger and the others were near him.

"I guess we're here--yet," snapped back Franz, grimly. "No telling how
long we shall be, though!"

"Come on now--sharp's the word!" yelled the commanding officer.
"Separate there, you!" he cried to Jimmy and the other four, for they
were too close together. "Spread out! You're too good a target for a
machine-gun as you stand!"

They knew the advice was good, and they took it. But they did not
separate too far, for they wanted to be together as they went into
this fight. It might be the last for all or any one of them.

The din was terrific. It seemed as if all the guns of the world were
letting go together, and as Jimmy rushed forward, firing at a foe he
could not see, he reflected that this same terrific havoc and riot
of sound was taking place for miles along the front held by the
Americans, and also along the sectors where the gallant French and
British were disputing with the Huns the right to rule the world.

"Forward! Forward! No lagging!" cried the young lieutenant, leading
his men. It was getting lighter now, as the sun arose, but the orb
itself could not be seen because of the smoke and mist.

But he need not have concerned himself about the laggards. There
were none in the 509th Infantry. Too often had they had their mettle
proved.

A shell rushed screechingly over Jimmy's head seemingly within a few
feet of him, and instinctively he ducked. Then he almost laughed at
himself, for he realized that if he heard the noise he was safe.

"We're getting closer," mused Jimmy as he leaped forward, firing as
he went, now crouching down, and again standing partly upright, as he
hurried on. He and his chums were passing through an orchard, now, on
their way to come to grips with the Germans. That is, it had been an
orchard, but all that was left of it now were a few broken stumps of
trees. The firing of heavy guns, and the bursting of big shells had
wiped out the work of nature.

There came an explosion on Jimmy's left--an explosion from a small
German shell that blew up a section of the orchard, tossing the
blackened and gnarled stumps high in the air. And with the stumps were
mingled poor, twisted human bodies.

For one terrible moment Jimmy feared for Franz and Iggy, whom he had
last noted almost at the very spot where the shell exploded. His heart
turned faint within him. But it was no time to falter. One must not
halt nor turn back even though one's own brother were torn to pieces.
Forward was the word in that grim and terrible fighting. Forward to
your own death, perhaps, to the death of those you held most dear!
Forward to insure life and happiness for those who would come after!
Such was the sacred duty!

And then, to his great relief, Jimmy heard a voice he knew well
exclaim:

"Ach! Him was one big whizz-bang, yes!"

"You said it, Iggy!" shouted Franz, and Jimmy saw his two comrades
emerge from the smoke and dust cloud, and rush forward. They had
just escaped death by the shell, which sent into eternity six beloved
bunkies of the 509th.

"Well, they're alive yet!" grimly mused Jimmy, as he fired and
crouched down. A look to the right showed him Roger and Bob doing the
same thing. So far the five Brothers had suffered no harm.

But the battle was only beginning. The German big guns had not yet
opened in force to reply to the challenge of the American heavy
artillery. So far the barrage had, in a great measure, protected our
lads. Now they were to move forward again. The guns at the rear
were elevated, to send the bursting shrapnel further into the German
ranks--to prevent them from rushing at the advancing American troops.

And now was a critical time, for even in spite of the barrage some
parties of Huns, in bomb-proofs, might suddenly arise and confront the
Americans. There was a chance for close fighting.

But it did not come. That part of No Man's Land over which Jimmy and
his chums were advancing, leaping from shell crater to mud hole, and
from one slimy pool to another, seemed to have been cleared of Huns.

Once again came the explosion of a comparatively large shell, and
again, hurled aloft in a shower of stones and dirt, went the bodies of
a half score of Americans. The Germans were taking frightful toll.

"This way! This way!" suddenly ordered the lieutenant. "Into the
woods!"

Jimmy saw a large grove of trees on his left. He turned toward them,
and he noted that Franz and Iggy were ahead of him, while Bob and
Roger came in the rear.

And, just as they reached the somewhat sheltering woods, there sounded
from the air above them several explosions, and with them was an
undercurrent of humming and droning as if from a million swarms of
bees.

"The Boche aeroplanes! They're right over us--a whole flock of 'em!"
cried Roger. "And they're dropping bombs on us!"




CHAPTER XVII

A BATTLE OF THE AIR


What Roger had said was only too true. The advance of the American
army had been halted, at least temporarily, by a sudden attack from
a large number of German aeroplanes. The Fokkers had arisen from far
enough back of the place where the American shells were falling to
escape them. And then they had sailed directly over the advancing
Americans, the center formation of the Huns' ships of the air being
almost directly over where our five heroes were now stationed in the
woods.

"Bombs! I should say so!" cried Jimmy, as one landed on the other edge
of the woods, and blew a great hole in the ground. "This is getting
too close for comfort!"

The German machines, having flown from the direction of their own
lines across the American front, dropping bombs that did great
execution, were now coming back again, to repeat the performance, it
was very evident.

"Why didn't we bring up some anti-aircraft guns?" demanded Bob,
as though some officer, immediately over him, had neglected this
precaution.

"Guess no one expected the Huns would try this trick," said Roger.
"It's a daring move, all right."

"And it's a dangerous one for us, too!" added Jimmy, grimly. "These
woods are a pretty good protection against shrapnel and machine-gun
fire, but they're absolutely useless when it comes to screening us
from aeroplane bombs. Of course we can hide from the sight of the
flying Huns, but they must know this wood is full of Americans, and
a bomb dropped anywhere among the trees will get some of us. It's
fierce!"

"You said it!" cried Franz. "Wow! That was a bad one!"

A bomb--one of the winged affairs that wrought such deadly havoc in
Paris and London--had fallen not one hundred feet from where the five
Brothers were crouching in the underbrush. The concussion jarred
them, and the force of the explosion uprooted several large trees that
injured a number of the command, while the bomb itself killed three in
dreadful fashion.

"Why don't our flying lads get after 'em?" demanded Franz. "Surely we
have some planes over here now--in fact, I know we have; though not
nearly enough. Where are they?"

Well might he ask that, for the Germans were circling around, now over
the woods and again over the open country, dropping their bombs, which
exploded, doing terrible damage, killing and wounding many.

Suddenly Bob, who was gazing skyward in despair, clutched Jimmy's arm
and cried:

"Look! Look! There they are! There come our boys! American machines!
See the Indian head! Now we'll see Mr. Hun on the run! Oh, boy!"

Jimmy gazed for a moment in the direction indicated by his excited
churn. Then he exclaimed:

"You're right! The American aviators are here at last, and I'll wager
it wasn't their fault that they didn't get here sooner! Now for a
fight in the air!"

And up just beneath the clouds, sometimes out of sight in the mist,
the American flying men attacked the enemy. Now there was no time for
the Huns to loose their bombs. They must look to their own safety. No
longer did they have all the odds on their side.

"Look! Look! See our man engage those two!" shouted Roger.

They all saw what he meant. One intrepid American airman had headed
for two Fokkers which were flying directly toward him, close together.

But in another instant one of the German planes was seen to swerve
to one side, and then it darted downward, and in a manner to indicate
that its pilot had been killed or wounded, for the machine was out of
control. Like a dead leaf it descended, crashing into a shapeless mass
in a field some distance from the woods.

"Now he's after the other!" cried Bob. "Oh, they're going to collide!"

But he spoke without knowledge of the skill to be shown by the
American pilot and his accompanying gunner. For, just as it appeared
as though the two hostile craft would come together in a mid-air
crash, the American machine seemed to slide up and over its opponent.
And then, just as the first German had done, the enemy craft crumpled
up, and down it went in dizzying whirls.

"Two at once! That's going some!" yelled Jimmy, capering about. They
were comparatively out of danger now, sheltered as they were in
the woods from the artillery and rifle and machine-gun fire of the
Germans. And no more airship bombs were being dropped.

"Some stunt, that!" declared Bob. "Wonder who they were--those
Americans?"

"I hope they live through it so we can find out," voiced Franz. The
battle in the air was now going on fiercely. There were ten American
machines attacking more than double that number of Germans, and, as
was always the case, the Huns were brave when they had the numerical
advantage. They fought bitterly, and with skill--that could not be
denied. And before the battle had been going on very long two American
machines had been shot down. Whether the men in them had been killed,
or not, remained to be seen.

"It's sort of going against us," said Jimmy, with a dry, choking sob.

"This is fierce!" cried Roger. "Why don't we send up some more
machines?"

"Haven't got 'em, maybe," remarked Franz. "Oh, look at that! They
collided head on!"

This actually happened. One of the larger American machines, the
ammunition probably having given out, was being attacked by a German
Fokker. Knowing that it was either kill or be killed, the pilot of the
craft with the Indian head painted on the underside of the wings took
a desperate chance.

Straightening out his craft, he headed it directly toward that of his
enemy. The latter tried to steer out of the way when it was seen what
the game would be, but he was unable to do so.

They came together with what must have been a fearful crash, though of
course not the faintest echo of it could be heard down in the woods.
And then, locked together in a death embrace, the two machines hurtled
over and over to earth, bursting into flames as they fell. They
smashed down in a swamp, and all four airmen were killed--the two
brave Americans and their perhaps no less intrepid German fighters.

"It's going to be a tight squeeze!" murmured Roger, as he and the
others gazed aloft. "There's three of our machines done for and here
come some more Germans. Oh, this is fierce!"

"More German machines? Where!" cried Jimmy.

"There!" and Roger pointed to the sky behind the German planes. "Ten
more of 'em!" he cried. "Now we're done for, sure!"

"Those aren't Hun planes! They're French!" yelled Bob. "See, they're
French! They've circled up behind the Germans! Now we have 'em between
two fires!"

And this was just what happened. The French, seeing that the battle of
the air was going against their American allies, had hastily sent up
a squadron of speedy craft. These arose very high, flew over and above
the Germans, out of sight, and then, coming down, attacked them in the
rear.

This was too much for Fritz. He had no taste for a battle against even
less odds than this. The Fokkers turned to flee, but it was too late
for all but two of them. These managed to elude the American and
French cloud-fighters and disappeared in the mist in the direction of
the German lines. It was presumed they reached there safely.

One after another the German machines were sent down, though at a
price, for three Frenchmen were killed and another American went to
his death. But he had paved the way with two Hun craft to his credit.

"Now it's over--all but the shouting!" cried Roger, and he was
capering about in an improvised dance of joy when Bob cried:

"Look! Look! Here comes a German machine down, and it's going to land
right about here! Oh, boy! This is bringing 'em down for keeps!"

His chums looked to where he pointed. A German craft was coming down,
but in such fashion that showed it was in volplane control, at least.
Swiftly it came down, headed for a field not far from the woods, in
the edge of which were the five Brothers.




CHAPTER XVIII

CAPTURED


Swiftly as falls a bird with a broken wing, down came the German
aeroplane. It was now within plain sight of the Americans stationed
in the woods, and, as it happened, a squad, of which our five Brothers
formed the major part, were nearer than anyone else.

"I can see their faces!" cried Bob. "They look worried all right!"

And well the Germans might, for they were being forced to land within
the enemy's lines.

"Guess their gasolene tank was shot to pieces," commented Roger. "The
plane doesn't seem to be damaged much."

And this, later, they learned was the case. A bullet had pierced the
petrol tank of the Boche craft, and the pilot and gunner had been
forced to land.

Down shot the craft, and, a moment later, it made a good landing in
a field. The machine ran along over the rough ground for a little
distance and then two figures, clad in regulation flying costumes,
were seen to leap out. They paused for a moment, trying to set fire to
their machine, so that it might not fall, comparatively undamaged as
it was, into the hands of the Americans. But this was not to be.

"Don't let them get away with that!" cried an officer, quickly. "Pick
off those two men, boys!"

Instantly rifles began to crack, and as the bullets sang about the
ears of the Huns they stopped their incendiary operations and began
to run. How they thought they could escape is inexplainable. They were
surrounded by Americans, and were some distance away from their own
lines.

"Come on, fellows!" cried Jimmy to his chums. "Don't let 'em get away.
We can head 'em off!"

"You said something!" yelled Bob. "Oh, boy! That was some fight!"

The battle in the air was over now, and though there had been a lull
in the contest in the immediate vicinity of our heroes, the firing was
going on in both wings of the American army.

Emerging from their shelter in the woods, so as to intercept at an
angle the fleeing Germans, Jimmy and his four Brothers ran hotfoot
over the open ground. Then the Huns saw the five lads coming, and
turned, as though to go in another direction.

"No you don't!" shouted Bob, as he sent a well-aimed bullet over
the head of the foremost German. He did not intend to hit the
fellow--merely to scare him. And it had that effect.

The man stopped suddenly, and raised his hands in the air.

"_Kamerad_!" he bellowed.

His companion was seen to be fumbling in his belt, as though trying
to get a hand grenade or lose his revolver. But the man who had
surrendered, realizing what would happen if any resistance were shown,
gave his companion a kick that sent him sprawling.

"_Kamerad_!" cried the kicker. And his companion, struggling to rise,
echoed:

"_Kamerad_!"

"You'd better surrender!" grimly observed Jimmy, as he and his chums
rushed up.

Quickly the Germans were disarmed, and then they were marched back,
ahead of their captors, to where stood the captain of the company of
which the five Brothers formed so active a part.

"Good work, Sergeant," complimented the captain, when Jimmy, as a
ranking non-com. over his companions, came back with the two German
aviators. "Good work! And you may have the pleasure of taking the
prisoners to the rear. We'll be held up here some time, I fancy.
Report to me when you return. And don't let those fellows get away!"
he added significantly.

"We'll take care of that, sir," said Jimmy grimly.

"Come on, you fellows! Hike!" ordered Roger to the captured airmen.
And a little later they were turned over to the proper authorities
in the rear. Some valuable plans and information concerning German
movements were found on the prisoners, and their capture was regarded
as important. Jimmy and his chums received commendation, and were
mentioned in the official reports of the day's grim doings.

"And now we'd better be getting back," suggested Jimmy, who was
in charge of the prisoner squad. "The fighting may start again any
minute, and we don't want to miss it."

"I should say not!" cried Bob. "Now that we can have a show for our
white agate there'll be some fun in it. But to have to crouch down in
a wood and let some one take pot shots at you from overhead isn't my
idea of a war at all."

They were marching along a camouflaged road when they saw an American
and a French machine coming down together on a level spot not far
away.

"Wonder if they're in trouble?" asked Roger.

"Doesn't seem so," answered Bob. "They seem to have the planes under
control. But let's go and see. Maybe we can help. They'll surely need
some attention after that fierce fighting."

The two machines, one a single seater and the other a double, came
to earth at the same time, and not far apart. And at the sight of
two aviators getting out of the American craft Jimmy gave a yell and
exclaimed:

"Well, if it isn't the Twinkle Twins! Good enough! What do you know
about that, fellows? The Twinkle Twins were among those who saved our
bacon this day!"

And it was, indeed, John and Gerald Twinkleton, otherwise known
as Jack and Jerry, or the Twinkle Twins, who had emerged from the
aeroplane.

"Well, of all good things! Look, Jerry!" dried Jack. "It's the five
Brothers!"

"Sure enough! Oh, say, what are you fellows doing here?" asked Jerry.

"Same as you were--disposing of some Boches," answered Jimmy. "Are you
hurt?"

"Not a scratch, though our plane was hit a lot," said Jack. "But we
ran out of gas, and had to come down here. Glad we did, too, or we'd
have missed seeing you. Cousin Emile is in the same boat as ourselves.
Here he comes! He'll be glad to see you."

And from the smaller plane there emerged an aviator whose very stride
across the field told what he was--a brave, intrepid man. Such was
Emile Voissard, cousin of the Twinkle Twins, and right well had he
earned the title, "Flying Terror of France."

"Ah, my American friends!" exclaimed Voissard, as he came over,
acknowledging the greetings he received. "I am glad to see you again.
It is good--_tres bien_!" and he smiled.

"Well, say, it was good to see you and the other Frenchmen go at those
Huns!" exclaimed Bob. "If we had known the Twinkle Twins were up there
among the Americans we'd have been worse scared than we were, when we
saw the Germans getting the best of it."

"Ah, it is nothing. _Voila_! What would you have?" and Voissard
shrugged his shoulders. "They are but beasts and they fight as the
beasts--they run, too, as the beasts! _n'est ce pas_?"

"Well, two of 'em tried to run, but we landed 'em!" exclaimed Roger,
with a laugh. "We just took 'em to the rear. Their petrol tank was
shot full of holes."

"Was it a machine with a sort of double iron cross on it?" asked Jack.

"That was it," said Roger.

"That's the one we couldn't seem to get," went on Jack. "She was a bit
too speedy for us. But it seems we got her after all."

"Or Jimmy and his bunch did", commented Jerry.

"Oh, well, it's all the same as long as they were 'got'!" and Jack
clapped Jimmy on the back.

"You are keeping up your good work, I see," commented Voissard.
"France shall soon be free of the mark of the beast!"

"Well, you're doing your share, sir!" commented Roger.

"It is nothing! If I could only do a thousand times as much!" and the
man who had earned such an enviable rating shook his head. "There are
so many of the Huns! So many! But we shall never give up! Never!" and
he drew himself up determinedly.

"But, my friends, we must not linger here," he went on. "The battle
will soon start again, and the fortunes of war may turn against us. We
should go and telephone for petrol, that we may take our machines back
behind the lines, to safety."

"Yes, we'll have to do that," declared one of the Twinkle Twins. "See
you again, boys!" and with waves of their hands they set off to find
the nearest telephone, that they might send word of their plight to
their hangars.

"Well, good luck!" called Jimmy and his chums to the brave Frenchman
and his no less brave cousins.

"That was some coincidence--that the Twinkles and their cousin Emile
should be fighting for us and we not know it," commented Roger, as the
five Khaki Boys trudged back. "I should say so," agreed Bob. "Say, we'd
better hurry!" he went on. "Sounds as if they were starting the game
once more!"

The noise of the big and little guns was beginning again, and hardly
had our heroes reached their command in the woods than the order came
to go forward.

With yells of savage delight it was received, and then there came a
desperate dash that carried Jimmy and his friends, as well as those
with him, well up toward the German lines.

Fierce and bloody was the fighting, and there was death in it, too,
for many. But ever did the Americans press on, slowly but steadily
driving back the Germans. On all sides great guns roared, and ears
were nearly split with the riot of sound.

When night came it found our five Brothers occupying some of the
trenches so long held by the Huns, who had been driven out. It was the
start of the movement that was to clean the Boches from France.

Tired, weary, blood-stained, dirty, hungry and thirsty--that was the
condition of all the fighters. And yet they would be ready to do it
all over again the next day, after a little rest and food. And food
they had, though not of the best.

"Sergeant Barlow and Corporal Dalton take listening post number
seven," the sergeant-major ordered two of the Brothers, after what
passed for supper. "Be on the alert. The Germans will very likely try
a counter-attack."

Bob and Roger prepared for their dismal night trick. Franz and Iggy
were sent to another part of the line, and Jimmy was on duty in the
dugout, assisting the telephone operator.

The night settled down. It was comparatively quiet now in the
trenches, in front of which barbed-wire entanglements had been hastily
put up. The Germans had done the same, and between the stretches of
wire another No Man's Land had been established.

Worn and weary, Roger and Bob waited for what they feared might
happen. But as the hours passed, and there was no sign nor movement
from the German lines, they began to think there would be no fighting.

Suddenly, however, the blackness of the night was broken by the red
glare of a rocket.

"What's that?" cried Bob.

"Signal of some sort," replied Roger. "Guess we'd better get on our
feet. The attack may be coming."

"Shall we go back and report this?"

"No, they must have seen it as soon as we did. We're only to report if
we see any of the enemy approaching this post."

They waited. Another rocket--a green one this time--soared aloft. And
then with a suddenness that was startling, a terrific firing broke out
from the German lines. "Here it comes--the counter-attack!" cried Bob.

As he spoke he and his companion saw a dark, massed body moving toward
them.

"Come on!" cried Bob. "We've got to report this!"

But before they had time to run back more than a few paces they were
surrounded by an attacking party of Germans. On either side of Bob
and Roger there was fierce fighting now going on. The two lads who had
been on duty in the listening post felt themselves caught and their
rifles wrested away before they had a chance to use them, and then
they were dragged over toward the German trenches.

"What's it all mean?" gasped Bob.

"We're captured!" said Roger. "Keep still! Don't give any information
no matter what they do! Keep still!"

"I will!" said Bob grimly.

One of the Germans dragging him along cried out an insulting epithet
and struck Bob across the mouth.

And then the captives were dragged away in the darkness.




CHAPTER XIX

THREE PRISONERS


The two Khaki Boys who had been on listening post duty were at once
disarmed by the Huns, and fairly dragged along in the darkness over
rough ground and among strands of barbed wire that scratched them, and
over stones that bruised them.

Bob had received a cut on the forehead, either from a blow or from a
glancing bullet, and the blood, running down into his eyes, blinded
him temporarily.

"Are you here, Roger?" he managed to gasp, as two burly Germans pulled
him along.

"Yes, old man, I'm here! Say, but this is tough luck!"

Again he was struck and ordered to keep silent.

Back they were hurried toward the German lines, whence had issued the
raiding party that had had such luck as to defeat a small and very
much surprised body of Americans. Perhaps it is not to their credit
to say they were surprised, but the truth must be told. Some one was
negligent, and failed to give the alarm in time.

Mackson and Jones, privates, who had been in the listening post next
to the one where Roger and Bob were stationed, had escaped in the
confusion. Amid the attack and counter-attack, and while the firing
and throwing of hand grenades was hottest, they ran back to the
trenches, calling out word of what had happened.

Jimmy was just coming on duty when the attack of the Germans took
place, and, hearing what Mackson gasped out, cried to him:

"Did you see anything of Bob and Roger?"

"Yes, they're gone!" was the answer.

"Gone? You mean killed?" and Jimmy felt as though his heart would stop
beating.

"No. They put up a good fight, but the Huns were too many for 'em.
Roger and Bob were taken off by the Boches!"

"Captured! Prisoners!" cried Jimmy. For an instant he hardly knew what
to do. The confusion was at its height, and there seemed to be some
demoralization among the Americans at this particular post. But order
was gradually coming out of it. A captain and two lieutenants hurried
up and took charge of matters. A brisk artillery fire was ordered to
sweep the German lines, to prevent, if possible, any further advance
in force. At the same time up and down the trenches and from dugouts
the gallant doughboys poured, ready to take revenge for the attack of
the Huns.

"Come on! Come on!" cried the captain, and with wild cheers and yells
his men followed him. Jimmy had a sudden thought. Rushing up to the
captain, who was listening to a report from a corporal who had been
wounded, and who had escaped after being captured, Jimmy cried:

"Two of my friends have been caught--Sergeant Barlow and Corporal
Dalton. May I take a relief party out, sir, and rescue them?"

"Yes, Sergeant Blaise! Take six men with you, and good luck! Keep in
touch with us, though. We don't want to be separated at a time like
this!"

"Yes, sir!" cried Jimmy, his heart now on fire with a desperate
resolve. He wished Franz and Iggy could be of the rescue party, but
they were already out of the trench, under the leadership of one of
the lieutenants, making a fierce counter-attack.

Quickly Jimmy picked out six privates, and rapidly explained what
he wanted. They ran forward in the darkness. Shells were exploding
overhead, there were flashes of rifle fire on every side, and a more
continuous stream of wicked spurts from machine guns. Rockets were
being sent up from the German lines, together with star-shells, and
these made the scene of the fight brilliantly light with, now and
then, recurrent periods of intense blackness.

"Barlow and Dalton captured?" cried one of the privates whom Jimmy had
selected. "That's tough!"

"We'll bring 'em back, or go over with 'em!" added another.

"Come on!" cried Jimmy, and he led the way.

He had only a vague notion of where to look for Bob and Roger. But he
and his companions in arms saw immediately ahead of them a dark mass
of fighting men. And they judged this to be the attacking party of
Germans, taking away prisoners, and fighting off the attacks of those
Americans who had hurried to the rescue.

"Come on! Let's get in on that!" cried Jimmy. "Forward!"

"Forward she is!" came the grim answer from one of the lads he was
leading.

There came a fierce burst of machine-gun fire from the German line to
the left of that fighting, struggling bunch of forms. It was followed
by yells of rage, mingled with pain, and then deep groans.

"Anyone here hit?" asked Jimmy.

"I think Jepson has gone out," some one answered. Jimmy hesitated. He
was between two duties--that toward one of his immediate force, and
the desire to rescue his chums. But he knew his duty as an officer
required him to look after his command first. He ran back to where two
of the privates were bending over Jepson. A look and a touch convinced
Jimmy that the man was past all aid.

"We'll carry him back later," he said. Then, stifling his own feelings
he cried: "Come on!"

Grimly his men followed.

On in the darkness they stumbled, now scarcely seeing where they were
going, and again blinded by fierce lights. Their ears were deafened by
the rattle and bang and roar of big and little guns.

"Why don't you call out?" suggested one of the remaining men in
Jimmy's small command. "Maybe Bob and Roger could hear you and answer.
Then you'd know where they are."

"Good idea! I will!" shouted Jimmy. He had to yell just then, for a
burst of artillery fire from the German lines, answering the guns of
the Americans, drowned all ordinary talk.

Then, when it was comparatively quiet again, Jimmy cried:

"Bob! Roger! Where are you? We're coming to the rescue!"

"Americans over this way!" was shouted in answer. "Over to your
right!"

Whether or not this was either Bob or Roger, Jimmy could not tell. But
the words were English, though immediately afterward could be heard
guttural German voices.

"That's funny!" said one of Jimmy's men. "I thought the main fighting
was over to our left. Now they tell us to go to our right."

"Well, we'll take a chance," said Jimmy.

He turned and was about to lead his small command in that direction
when they were subjected to a fierce burst of fire. There was no time
to drop and escape it, though Jimmy called to the men to lie flat as
soon as he realized that a machine gun was aimed in their direction.
For two of his men there was never any more need of orders. They were
instantly killed, and one was so wounded that he could not move.
This only left Jimmy and two men. But the sergeant had no thought of
turning back.

"Will you stick?" he asked, when the sudden spurt of machine bullets
was over.

"Go ahead!" was the grim reply.

They had hardly taken a dozen paces when from the ground all about
them dark forms suddenly arose, and from what were afterward found to
be shell holes, and the remains of trenches, other forms leaped. There
were commands in German, and, in less time than it takes to tell it,
Jimmy and his two companions were seized by several German soldiers,
their arms taken away, and, after being beaten and kicked, they were
rushed over toward the Hun lines. Dazed, wounded and sick at heart,
Jimmy could hardly understand what had happened. Then it was borne to
him that he and his rescue party--or what was left of it--had been the
victim of a trick. They had run into an ambuscade of Germans who
were hidden among the holes and ruined trenches, and had risen up to
capture more prisoners.

Rousing himself, and determining to find out how many of his fellow
soldiers were in the same disastrous position as himself, Jimmy cried:

"Any of the Five Hundred and Ninth here? I'm Sergeant Blaise and--"

"Great guns!" cried a voice Jimmy well knew. "It's Blazes! We're
here, Jimmy!" went on the voice in a half sob. "Bob and I are
here--prisoners!"

"Then we're in the same boat!" answered Jimmy, who had recognized
Roger's voice. "I'll try and get to you, and then--"

"Shut up--American pig!" cried a Hun in fairly good English as he
struck Jimmy in the face. And then the Sergeant knew how he had been
betrayed. It was by a German who spoke English.




CHAPTER XX

THE CAPTAIN AGAIN


Worried over the possible fate in store for them, sick at heart,
smarting with wounds and bruises, and with Jimmy regretting the deaths
of the men he had led out to help rescue Bob and Roger, it is no
wonder that the three Brothers hardly knew what happened in the next
hour. All they remembered was that they were pushed, dragged and
fairly punched along in the darkness that was, every now and then,
lighted by gun flashes or the star-shells. The fighting was still
going on, though it was growing less intense, and it seemed evident
that the attacking party of raiding Germans had been beaten back.

But it was at a heavy cost, for many Americans had been killed or
wounded, and several taken prisoners, including our three friends.
Later, however, they learned that the losses of the Huns had been
heavier, except in the matter of prisoners. Only two had been captured
as against perhaps a score of Americans. The raid had been a surprise,
and this quality of it led to its success.

For a time, after he had learned of the presence of his two chums
in the raiding party of Huns, Jimmy was separated from them in the
darkness and confusion. He could not locate them by calling their
names, for each time he tried this he was struck by one of his
captors, which led him, finally, to desist. He realized that if he
exasperated the Germans too much they would not hesitate to kill him,
even though he was a prisoner.

But later on, when it seemed as though he had been pulled and dragged
over miles and miles of rough country, Jimmy was aware that the party
of men who had him in charge had been joined by another squad of the
Boches. And to his delight he heard some one say:

"Wonder what became of Blazes?"

It was Bob's voice, and Jimmy at once answered:

"Here I am! Is Roger there?"

"Yes," came a voice out of the darkness, and it ended in a gasp of
pain, as if the words had been stopped by a blow.

Jimmy felt as though he could tear himself loose and hurl himself on
the cruel captors, but he was held fast.

There was rapid talk in German among the members of the raiding party,
and it could not be doubted that they were exulting over the success
of the sortie, such as it had been.

A little later Jimmy was prodded forward again by the butts of German
guns, and he was aware that Roger and Bob were advancing along with
him. Whether there were any other Americans in that party Jimmy could
not tell, as it was dark now, since the "fireworks" had ceased.

"Tough luck!" murmured Bob, as he limped along beside Roger.

"You said it," answered Jimmy. They spoke in low voices so as not to
incur the further enmity of their captors.

"What do you think they'll do with us?" asked Roger.

"Try to get information," was Jimmy's answer. "But don't give them
any! Keep stiff upper lips and let 'em ask all they want to. Don't
answer!"

"We won't!" murmured Roger and Bob, but they did not realize how hard
it was going to be to keep that resolve.

Forward in the darkness they stumbled, being pushed and shoved when
they were not roughly seized and dragged, and at last they seemed to
have been brought to a place where they were to be detained for some
time. They were led down into a trench and along this in single file,
a German preceding and following each of the three captives, so they
were thus separated. They discovered that the German trenches were not
much better as regarded mud and water than their own, and they did not
have the protection of "duck boards" except in a few places. So that
the progress of Bob, Roger and Jimmy was through mud that came nearly
to the knees.

Suddenly their captors halted. They had reached a wider part of
the trench, and in the dim light from a small electric bulb, which
indicated this place to be one of the more permanent German positions,
the three Brothers saw a concrete dugout.

The door of this was kicked open, and after the three Khaki Boys had
been hurriedly searched, and all their personal belongings taken from
them, they were thrust inside in the darkness and the door was closed.

And then, clinging together in their pain and woeful state, they told
each other what had happened--Roger and Bob relating how they had
been cut off and captured, and Jimmy telling of his leading the rescue
party, only to be betrayed into going in the wrong direction, deceived
by the call of some Hun whose English was good enough to do the trick.

"And now we're here," sighed Bob. "What's to become of us?"

"I think they'll take us before some officer and question us," said
Jimmy. "They'll wait until morning, though, to give us a longer taste
of misery."

"Morning!" gasped Roger. "Will morning ever come to a hole like this?"
and his eyes tried to pierce the blackness.

"There may be a window to it, or some way of letting light in, unless
it's away down underground," Jimmy went on. "I couldn't tell what it
was from the outside."

"Me, either," admitted Bob. "Well, this sure is tough luck!"

"Don't be downhearted!" advised Roger. "Our boys may attack in a few
hours and rescue us."

"Yes, they may," assented Jimmy, and this cheered them up for a time.

How long the hours seemed! Would morning ever come, and would they see
a gleam of light when it did? Or would they still be in blackness?

This question was answered for them some time later, when, after being
sunk in painful silence, they were aroused by a faint gleam coming in
through what proved to be a small opening in the roof of the dugout.
It was a little gleam of sunshine, and it cheered the boys almost as
much as if it had been news from home.

"We're not in an underground dungeon, anyhow," said Jimmy.

The light grew stronger, and presently the door of their prison was
opened. "I hope it's breakfast," gasped Bob. "Even if it's only a
glass of water."

But it was not even that. Several burly, brutal Germans leered in the
faces of the boys, and one, who spoke fairly good English, ordered
them to come out.

"Where are you taking us?" demanded Jimmy.

"You'll see," was the enigmatical answer.

They did not have long to wait, for, presently, they were taken before
a German officer, whose rank they were unable to determine, though he
seemed to wield considerable authority.

He was seated at a table in a dugout most comfortably fitted up.
Before him was a mass of papers, and at his side stood a bottle of
wine from which he poured a glass now and then, as he puffed at a
pipe. There were several others in the room, some officers and others,
clerks or secretaries.

I shall not relate what followed. Suffice it to say that the reason
for the night of misery inflicted on the boys, and the failure to give
them breakfast, was soon evident. It was to break their spirits,
and cause them to answer and give information as to their own forces
opposed to the Huns.

Every device of refined and barbarous cruelty was practiced as well
as every trick of cunning. But the three remained steadfast, and
even laughed in the faces of their captors. But not a jot of vital
information did they give, though they boasted in exaggerated terms of
the strength of the commands to which they were attached, and told of
countless armies on the way over to wipe the Huns from the face of the
earth.

At last the German officer, in a burst of rage, ordered the three
prisoners taken away, and this was done with great roughness. This
coupled with their terrible night and the mental and physical torture
inflicted at the inquisition, made the young soldiers sick at heart
and body. Once more they were thrust into their horrible prison, and
not until nearly noon was any food given them.

Then it was only some greasy, slimy water, probably intended for soup,
together with some chunks of mouldy bread.

"But we've got to eat it, boys!" said Jimmy. "We've got to keep up our
strength."

"What's the good of it!" sighed Bob, with a half cry of anguish.

"So we can escape, of course!" said Jimmy with more fierceness and
energy than he really felt. "Think I'm going to stay in this hole?"

"How are you going to get out?" Roger wanted to know.

"I'll show you!" went on Jimmy, and by his strength of character, and
by his forced spirits he bolstered up the courage of his companions.
They managed to choke down the food, vile as it was, and seemed to
feel a little better for it.

Their miseries of the next few days I will not detail. In fact, the
boys themselves could not remember all of them, horrible as they
were. Again and again they were questioned, but always they remained
steadfast, and gave no information that could be of any value to the
Huns.

Then they were taken from their horrible prison and removed to a camp,
some distance in the rear, where there were a number of other Allied
captives, in as miserable a condition as that to which the three Khaki
Boys were now reduced.

"Well, we've got a better chance now," said Jimmy, with an assumption
of cheerfulness, when they were thrust into the barbed wire enclosure.

"A better chance for what?" asked Bob.

"To escape," was the answer, "It's a common occurrence for prisoners
to get out of German prison camps, though I won't say that they all
get back to their friends. Anyhow, we'll try the first chance we get."

There was one advantage of being in the prison camp, and away from the
dungeon that was partly underground. The air and light were better,
and the food was somewhat improved, though it was far from being good,
satisfying, or even decent.

But the natural healthfulness of the boys kept them up, and they
soon recovered from the slight wounds and bruises caused by the fight
during which they were captured.

"Heard of any chance to escape?" asked Roger, when they had been in
the camp about two weeks.

"No, though there is talk of digging under the barbed wire and a lot
of the men going out," Jimmy answered. "You want to hold out and hide
all the food you can. Well need it if we do get away."

His advice was followed, and, though the prisoners did not get much
more than enough to keep them alive, the three boys managed to hide
some scraps of bread and a bit of what was called "sausage," though it
was made mostly from the meal of peas and beans.

As Jimmy had said, there was a plot, hatched among some of the English
prisoners, to break out of the prison camp. But before there was a
chance to put it into operation Fate stepped in and gave her aid--that
is, it was aid for some, and death for others.

Not far from the German prison camp was a German ammunition dump, and
one night there passed over it a raiding squadron, though whether of
French, American or English airmen could not be learned by our heroes.

At any rate several bombs were dropped and one, either more accurately
placed than the others, or falling more luckily, fell on the dump and
it went up in a terrible and fearful burst of powder and shell.

The concussion caused several of the prison camp buildings to
collapse, and a number of Russians were killed. The barbed and charged
wires about the camp were torn loose and then it was that Jimmy saw
his chance--a chance taken by many of the captives.

"Come on!" he shouted to Roger and Bob, as they awoke in the darkness
and confusion, hardly knowing what had happened. It seemed like the
end of the world.

Out rushed the three Brothers, catching up their few belongings and
the precious packets of food they had hoarded against just such a
chance as this, though they had not hoped for it so soon.

The Germans were in such confusion, and such havoc had been caused
among them when the ammunition dump went up, that they had no time,
then, to look to their prisoners. Consequently the unfortunate men who
had been kept in the horrible camp scattered to the four winds, eager
to make their way back to their own lines.

Jimmy, Bob and Roger formed a little party among themselves. They
had only a general notion of which direction to take, but again Fate
seemed to help them, for they were not stopped all that night. They
tramped on, taking the most unfrequented ways, stumbling on in the
darkness and on the alert for a sight of German soldiers. But the
attack of the Allied airships, and the consequent destruction of a
great pile of German shells, had caused such havoc back of the Hun
lines that for several hours all was in confusion.

"It's getting daylight," murmured Bob, as he and his two chums were
limping down a road. Limping is the correct term, for their own good
army shoes had been taken from them and replaced by German apologies,
with paper soles, which now were all but gone.

"What shall we do?" asked Roger.

"Keep on until we see something to stop us," advised Jimmy. "We are
going toward our own lines, I think, or where our lines used to be,
though there may have been a lot of changes since we were caught."

"Can't we stop and get a drink?" panted Bob. "My tongue is like a
piece of that leathery stuff the Germans gave us and called meat. I've
got to drink!"

It was light enough now to disclose a small stream not far away.
Looking about to make sure no Germans were in the vicinity, Jimmy led
the way toward it. A drink of water and the eating of some of their
scanty stock of food would put new life in them.

They reached the water safely, near a small clump of trees. They
drank, and though the fluid seemed half mud never was there a sweeter
draught to parched throats and dry mouths. Then, as they were about to
open their rude packets of food. Bob clutched Jimmy's arm.

"Look!" he exclaimed, pointing off to the left.

"A searching party!" gasped Jimmy. Then Roger saw at what his chums
were gazing--a squad of German soldiers under the command of an
officer, and they were marching straight toward the clump of trees
where our heroes hoped to stay and eat!

"Quick!" cried Jimmy. "Burrow down in the leaves and dirt! If they
see us we'll be shot on sight as escaping prisoners! No chance for
quarter! Burrow down!"

And amid the dirt and dead leaves of the little patch of woods the
boys scratched shallow hiding places for themselves, stuffing their
food inside their shirts.

They were only just in time, for no sooner were they as well covered
as they could manage in the hurry than the Germans came tramping into
the little grove.

However, they did not seem to be acting on any precise information,
as presently, after a cursory search in the grove, they left, and the
boys breathed easier again.

"Shall we chance it now?" whispered Bob to Jimmy, cautiously raising
his head from the hole amid the leaves.

"Wait a bit," advised his chum. And, in ten minutes more, when it
seemed that the party of Huns must be far enough away, the lads emerged.

"Close call!" murmured Bob, brushing off some of the dirt. "But I
guess we can eat now--such stuff as we have! Say, Roger, did you--"

He paused, to gaze in the direction where Roger was looking. And
Jimmy, attracted by the attitude, gazed also. And they saw a strange
sight.

Marching away, for which the three Brothers felt great relief, was the
searching part of Germans. But this was not at what Roger was looking.
It was the sight of a man, in a German uniform, seated on a fallen
log at the edge of the clump of trees. The man was looking over some
papers, and he must have been there when the searching party passed.
Perhaps he had been with them.

"Look! Look!" murmured Roger. "It's the captain again. Captain Frank
Dickerson--the officer who saved our lives at the red mill; and he's
in a German uniform!"




CHAPTER XXI

BACK WITH FRIENDS


There was no doubt of it. So dramatic had been the circumstances under
which they had first seen this strange man that the boys would never
forget his face. He was dressed differently now--in an unmistakable
uniform of the Germans--but it was the same man.

"What in the world is he doing here?" demanded Bob.

"There can be only one answer to that question," said Jimmy, and his
voice was low and intense.

"And what is the answer?" Roger wanted to know.

"He's a German spy!" was the declaration.

"When he saved us at the burning mill he was in an American uniform.
And now he is in German uniform. He's a spy!"

"He's in German uniform all right, there's no question of that"
declared Bob. "But what makes you think he is a spy--I mean a German
spy, Jimmy?"

"Because he was within our lines, or close to them, in a uniform that
was calculated to appear like one of ours. And, instead of going back
with us to help us find our own command, he hiked off in the direction
of the Huns. And now he's here again."

"But maybe he's a regular German, though he didn't talk much like
one," suggested Bob. "I mean the time he saved us at the mill. He
might be a decent, human sort of German--and he couldn't bear to
see us roasted to death. Maybe that's why he saved us. Of course, I
remember he acted queerly, and--"

"I don't know why he saved us," declared Jimmy. "But I believe he's
a German spy, and he was close to, if not actually within, our lines,
trying to get information. And if he's a spy he ought to be hanged for
it--that's the punishment of all spies."

"Yes, hanging isn't any too good, for a German spy," agreed Roger.

"And if we ever get the chance we'll denounce this fellow," went on
Jimmy. "We can tell how we saw him in an American uniform, or part of
it, near the red mill, and now he wears a German outfit. Hanging won't
match his crime."

"And yet," said Bob slowly, "it would be sort of hard to denounce
him." "Why?" asked Jimmy quickly.

"Because he saved our lives," was the quick answer. "Of course, we'll
have to denounce him, fellows, if we get the chance. But it will go
hard. He saved our lives!"

Jimmy was silent a moment, as he gazed out amid the trees in the
direction of the German searching party and the officer seated,
looking over some papers. Then Jimmy said, slowly:

"Yes, he saved our lives!"

The three hardly knew what to do. And yet, now, there seemed to be but
one thing--they must make all haste in the direction of the American
lines. At any moment the searching squad might come back, or another
might make its appearance, for the Germans would not let the inmates
of the prison camp get away without an effort to bring them back.

"Well, this Captain Dickerson has an American name all right, and
he may be a German spy," said Bob. "But he isn't within the American
lines just at present, so he has a right to wear a German uniform I
suppose. Remember how he hesitated about giving his name? Maybe he
made one up."

"He won't wear that uniform long if any of our boys catch him!"
declared Jimmy. "Look here, fellows. His saving of our lives was a fine
thing, and we can never forget it. But, at the same time, duty is duty,
and our highest duty is not to the man toward whom we feel so grateful,
 but toward our own army and the boys of the Five Hundred and Ninth.
If we ever get back to our friends we'll have to denounce Captain Frank
Dickerson, or whoever that fellow it. That's all there is to it"

"I--I guess you're right," agreed Bob, slowly. "It's tough, but it has
to be done!"

"If we get the chance!" added Roger.

"Of course! If we get the chance," agreed Jimmy. "Mind, I don't say
that we actually have to give him up, or capture him," he added. "That
would be too much. But it's our duty to tell what we have seen."

The others nodded their heads.

"We haven't a chance to capture him now." Jimmy resumed. "He's armed,
and we're not. Besides, even if we three could overpower him, he might
signal to the Germans who were just here. No, all we can do is to wait
and see what happens. And the first thing we'd better do is to get out
of this neighborhood. It isn't healthy!"

They looked once more in the direction of "Captain Frank Dickerson,"
as he had called himself. He had folded up his papers and was about to
rise from the log.

"Duck, fellows! He's looking this way!" hoarsely whispered Bob, and
the boys dropped behind a fallen tree.

The officer in the German uniform did, indeed, look toward the woods,
but he made no advance that way, and presently walked off in the
direction taken by the searching party which had been so close to the
three former captives, evidently without knowing it.

"And now we'll make tracks the other way," decided Jimmy, and they
put some distance between themselves and the man they believed a spy
before they halted to eat.

"I'm glad I didn't have my five thousand francs with me when we fell
into the hands of the Germans," said Sergeant Jimmy, as they sat and
rested after the rather meager meal.

"Why?" asked Bob. "Maybe you could have bought some food, by bribing a
guard."

"Not a chance!" was the answer. "The Huns would have taken every cent.
No, I don't mind Maxwell having it--even if he's skipped with it,
or if he's missing with it in his pockets. That's better than having
German jailers take it. But I guess we'll never see the sergeant or
the money again."

"It doesn't look so," agreed Roger. "Well, it's the fortune of war, I
reckon. But have we any chance of seeing our friends again?"

"We'll make a big try," declared Jimmy.

Of the miseries of the next two days the Khaki Boys never like to
talk afterward. They ate all their food, and were still hungry. They
managed to find some raw turnips which they devoured, declaring,
in their hunger, that they were the best meal they had ever eaten.
Fortunately they managed to find water, though they had to drink it by
stealth for they were like hunted animals, making their way through a
country held and devastated by a cruel foe. They hid most of the day
and traveled by night, not knowing whether or not they were going in
the right direction.

But they kept moving, though, at times, Bob, who seemed worse off than
either of his chums, said he must give up. But Jimmy and Roger fairly
dragged him on.

One day, when it seemed that they must lie down in a field and give
up, they saw, coming over the top of the hill, a party of soldiers. It
was getting dusk, and they could hardly distinguish the uniforms.

"If it's Germans I'm too tired to run," said Bob, weakly. "Let 'em
take us!"

"I will not!" declared Jimmy fiercely. "I'll fight 'em with stones,
and die fighting, rather than go back to a prison camp!"

"I'm with you!" cried Roger, and this attitude on the part of his
chums seemed to rouse Bob.

Each one selected a large stone, though whether they really would have
used them in their desperation I can not say. But in a moment all was
changed.

The three figures, standing together in the field, attracted the
attention of the officer leading the party of soldiers. He gave a
sharp command, and at the sound of the words Jimmy cried:

"They're English! They're English! Hurrah, fellows! We're with friends
once more!" And he ran forward followed by his chums.

It was true. A party of English soldiers, sent out to get some
information, had come upon the three escaping prisoners, and, a little
later, Bob, Roger and Jimmy were being well cared for while they told
their story of what had happened.

"And so we blew their nasty dump to bits; eh, lad?" asked an English
lieutenant, or "leftenant," as they are called.

"Yes," assented Jimmy.

"A little bit of hall right, I call that!" commented a cockney
sergeant.

So weak and exhausted were our friends that they had to stay in the
English billets several days before they could be sent under escort to
their own command. And you may imagine better than I can describe it
the joy of Franz and Iggy when they welcomed their Brothers once more.

"It's like having you back from the dead," declared Franz, with tears
in his eyes as he held the hands of the three friends.

"Better even, for alife they is!" exclaimed Iggy. "I home a letter
will write saying not to read the other what I sent."

"What other?" asked Bob.

"Oh, he wrote one saying you had been captured and that he was going
to hike into German territory and find you the first chance he had,"
explained Franz.

"Sure I would go, but now not," declared Iggy. "I home write annudder
letter soon."

"It was good of you to think of us," said Jimmy. "And now tell us
about yourselves. Are you all right? Have you done any fighting, and
have you heard anything of Maxwell and our missing money?"

"Oh, have a heart!" laughed Franz. "You're worse than an intelligence
officer wanting to know the results of a trench raid. But we're all
right, as far as that goes."

"Except we wos of broken hearted yes for fears of you," put in Iggy.

"Sure we were worried to death," agreed Franz. "There didn't seem
to be a chance for you. As for fighting, well we haven't done much,
though I hear there's a big battle about to come off. And as for
Maxwell, we haven't heard a word."

It was one afternoon when the five Brothers were in a dugout, awaiting
orders to go on duty for the night, that Jimmy bethought himself of
the sight they had had of the mysterious captain.

"We didn't tell Franz and Iggy about him," he remarked to Roger and
Bob.

"No. Go ahead with the story," said Bob. "Maybe they can throw some
light on it."

But Franz and Iggy--though the latter did not say much--could offer no
explanation save that put forth by Jimmy and the two lads who had seen
what he had seen--that Captain Frank Dickerson was a German spy.

The night passed without incident of moment, except for two false
alarms that the Germans were starting a general engagement. And in the
morning, after breakfast, the long-looked-for word came.

"It's the advance!" was the general cry. "We're going forward and
pinch out the German salient!"

There was one on this sector--a salient, or wedge, driven into the
American line, or, rather, one that had existed since the Americans
had taken over this particular part of the country.

"Now for the big battle!" cried Bob.

"And may it soon bring the end of the war!" added Roger.

Jimmy marched along with his chums, going to take charge of a squad
that would be among the leaders of the advance. And, as he passed a
group of American officers, saluting as he did so, his heart almost
stopped beating. For standing in their midst, and conversing earnestly
with them, was Captain Frank Dickerson, and this time he wore the
uniform of an American officer, with the two bars denoting his
captaincy!




CHAPTER XXII

FIERCE FIGHTING


Jimmy's astonishment at seeing the man they had called a German spy
was duplicated by his companions. With one accord they halted and
stood staring at the captain who had saved their lives. On his part
he did not see them, apparently. He stood there talking with other
officers as calmly and coolly as though nothing worried him.

"There he is!" exclaimed Bob.

"No question about it!" said Roger.

"The dog!" fairly hissed Franz. "And to think he's going to betray our
secrets to the Huns!"

"Not if I can help it!" declared Jimmy, and there was firm resolve in
his voice.

"What are you going to do?" asked Roger, though he could almost guess
the answer of his chum.

"Come over here," said Jimmy Blaise to the otter Brothers. It was time
they should be marching up on their way to the front to take part in
the big advance. But there was also vital necessity of action at this
juncture. And so many soldiers and officers were hurrying along that
the temporary halt of Jimmy and his bunkies would not be noticed.

"Don't we to fight go?" asked Iggy, somewhat puzzled by the halt. "I
mine gun haf und many bullets. To fight it is my idea, yes."

"You've got the right idea!" declared Bob. "We'll be fighting soon
enough. But Iggy, do you see that fellow over there?" and he pointed
to Captain Dickerson.

"Sure I see him. Him was the man what saved us at the fire."

"Exactly. And he went over toward the Germans, didn't he?"

"I thinks me he did," admitted Iggy.

"When did you see him last?" asked Franz, as if this was a trial and
he had the examination of witnesses in hand.

"We saw him between our lines and the German forces, and he wore a
German uniform," declared Bob.

"And now he wears an American outfit," added Roger.

"That settles it!" declared Roger. "The verdict is unanimous. Captain
Dickerson, as he calls himself, is a spy, and it's our duty to
denounce him!"

"Yes," said Sergeant Jimmy, "he saved our lives--there's no doubt
about it. But he's a spy. It breaks my heart to do it, but duty is
duty! We'll have to expose him!"

He looked at Roger and Bob. Solemnly and mournfully they nodded their
heads in assent.

"I don't know as much about it as you three fellows do," said Franz,
"but it sounds as though you'd have to. Tough luck, but it's got to be
done."

"How about you, Iggy?" asked Bob.

"I fights mit youse," said the Polish lad simply, "and what you says I
say!"

"That ends it!" went on Jimmy. "I'd rather lose ten times five
thousand francs than do this, but--well, let's get it over with, and
then we'll jump into the fight and try to forget it."

He walked up to the group of officers, in the midst of which still
stood the captain. Jimmy saluted Major Wrightson, the senior officer
then present, and when the latter looked at the lad, seeing that he
had something to say, Jimmy spoke:

"My comrades and I," he said, indicating his four Brothers, "wish to
denounce that man as a German spy!" He spoke quietly, and pointed an
accusing finger at Captain Dickerson.

"What's that?" cried the major, in great surprise.

Jimmy repeated his statement, and as he did so he kept his eyes on the
face of the accused. The latter smiled faintly, but did not seem at
all alarmed.

"Have you any evidence to support this amazing statement?" asked the
major.

"Plenty," answered Jimmy, and then, briefly, he told what he and his
chums had seen. During the dramatic recital, which was corroborated
at several points by Roger and Bob, as well as Franz and Iggy, the
captain never said a word. He continued calmly smoking a cigarette he
had lighted.

"Can this be possible?" exclaimed a lieutenant, and he seemed to
shrink away from Captain Dickerson.

"Have you anything to say regarding the accusation of these lads,
Captain Dickerson?" asked the major, at length.

The accused flicked away the end of his cigarette. He looked at the
boys, smiling cynically, and then answered calmly:

"No, I have nothing to say!"

"It is my duty--my painful duty--to order you under arrest then,"
said the major. "And it breaks my heart to do it. You were once my
lieutenant and--"

Emotion overcame him, but he signaled to a captain, who summoned two
orderlies, and in charge of these Captain Dickerson was led away under
arrest.

"This matter will be taken up later, Sergeant Blaise," said the major.
"It will have to wait until after the battle. He might better have
been killed in action a dozen times than have this happen," he added
rather ambiguously. "This is terrible!"

"It was hard to do this, after he had saved our lives," said Jimmy,
"but it had to be."

"Yes," assented the major brokenly, "it had to be. And now let's
forget it in giving battle to the Huns! It's up to us to redeem
whatever wrong he may have done," and he nodded in the direction of
the captain, who had been led away under arrest.

"He took it calmly enough," remarked Bob, as the five Brothers marched
away.

"Never turned a hair," added Roger. "But you've got to have nerve to
be a spy."

"I suppose they'll shoot him," observed Franz. "They don't have time
for hanging any more. He'll face a firing squad all right."

"It's too bad!" declared Jimmy. "But it had to be. I'll say this for
him--he's a brave man to venture back here, when he might be sure he'd
be exposed--if not by us by some one else. Yes, he's a brave man!"

It was with no very light hearts, at first, that Jimmy and his chums
marched on toward the front lines where they had been ordered to take
their places for the general advance. The scene of the last half-hour
preyed on their minds. But they were satisfied that they had done
their duty.

"What's the program, sir!" asked Jimmy, as he reported to his second
lieutenant.

"Well, we're going forward just as soon as our barrage gets in working
order," was the answer. "I expect that will be any minute, now. See to
it that every man in your squad has his gas mask, his pick and shovel,
his canteen and mess gear. We may be several days under fire, and the
supply wagons won't be able to get up if the Huns start shelling the
roads, as they're likely to."

"Yes, sir," answered Jimmy, saluting. Then he and his chums put in
several busy minutes.

Jimmy, Roger and Franz, as sergeants, would each have charge of a
squad to lead into the fight, and in Jimmy's squad were Bob and Iggy,
the corporals.

"Everything in readiness here?" asked the young lieutenant who had
given Jimmy, Roger and Franz their orders. He came along the trench,
glancing now and then at his wrist watch to note the approach of the
hour set for the beginning of the barrage.

"Everything ready, sir," reported Jimmy, and Roger and Franz repeated
this.

"Very good. You won't have long to wait now."

The lieutenant passed on, making his observations. The five Brothers
were talking in low tones, speculating on many things. They talked
of what they had gone through in the past, for each one realized that
there might be no future for him after this great battle that was
pending. And they talked of the spy captain, of the missing Sergeant
Maxwell, and other matters.

"If we live through this," Jimmy was saying, "I'm going to get leave
and see if I can't find Maxwell. It isn't so much for the sake of the
money as it is for him. He was a good friend to me."

"To all of us," declared Bob.

"Well, I can't imagine what has become of him," said Roger. "If he--"

There was no chance for further words, for at that moment it seemed
as if all the thunderstorms from the beginning of the world to the
present time had broken loose at once.

"It's our barrage!" cried Jimmy. "Get ready to go over and fight!"

And ten minutes later the five Brothers were in the midst of the most
desperate struggle in which they had had a part since the start of the
World War.




CHAPTER XXIII

THE LONELY HUT


And now it was that Jimmy and his chums were advancing across a
dangerous stretch, protected by their own barrage. They rushed forward
shouting, though it was hard for any one to hear his own voice, so
terrific was the din.

There was little use in firing rifles now. The shrapnel from the
American guns would take care of any Germans among which it fell. But
when the barrage ceased, and the infantry would rush forward to try to
take the Hun positions--then would come the most deadly fighting.

Forward, foot by foot, rushed the Khaki Boys, and on either side of
them their bunkies also advanced. They were to go forward until their
barrage ceased.

But it was not easy going after the first rush, for the Germans had
awakened to the importance of the pending battle and they were now
sending over a counter-barrage. With a roar that matched the opening
chorus of the American guns, those of the Boche sent out their
missiles of death.

And many of the shrapnel bullets, or pieces of exploding shells, found
their marks. The ground was strewn with dead and dying, for the German
barrage was meeting with and passing through that of the Americans.

Yet the advance never stopped. Company after company of khaki-clad
youths and men rushed from the trenches and started across that
vale of death. They advanced in battle formation--not too close
together--for that offered too good a target for the machine-guns, and
though many nests had been wiped out, many still remained.

Suddenly the awful ear-rending chorus on the American side died away
as if by magic. The silence was almost as appalling as had been the
terrific noise, for it portended more.

"Come, on!" cried the officers to their men. "Come on! Wipe out the
Huns!"

And the men followed them to victory or death.

Jimmy found himself yelling and firing his rifle as rapidly as he
could pull the trigger. For a moment the five Brothers, all together,
seemed to be in comparative safety. But then bullets began to sing
about their heads like angry wasps.

"Come on! Come on!" cried Jimmy, and no one faltered.

Suddenly, from a little mound of earth in front of the five, there
came a sound as of some one tearing stiff cloth, or beating a drum
more rapidly than one was ever beaten before. The Khaki Boys knew what
it meant--a machine-gun nest.

Instinctively they dropped to earth, and the bullets flew over their
heads. If they found living targets farther on the lads did not turn
to see.

"We've got to wipe that out!" cried Jimmy.

"We're with you!" shouted Bob.

Franz, looking forward from between two little hummocks of earth,
suddenly fired his rifle.

"There goes one Hun!" he exulted.

"And I got a second!" exclaimed Roger.

They were both good shots and each had gotten his enemy.

"Come on--rush 'em!" yelled Jimmy, jumping up. Bob attempted to pull
his chum back, for it was almost certain death to stand up in front
of a machine-gun emplacement. But it was too late. Jimmy had taken his
chance, and he lived through it.

For a brief instant there was no firing from where the machine-gun was
hidden and this was Jimmy's opportunity and that of his chums. With
wild yells they leaped up and followed his lead.

A moment later they were fighting fiercely with half a dozen Germans
who composed what was left of the automatic gun squad. The weapon
appeared to be jammed, for one of the Huns was frantically working
at the firing mechanism. And it was this same jamming, as was learned
later, that, undoubtedly, saved the lives of Jimmy and his chums.

Roger shot pointblank at one Boche and Bob bayoneted another. Then the
remainder raised their hands and cried: "_Kamerad_!"

"We haven't any time to take prisoners!" yelled Franz.

But they did not get the chance. The Germans left alive leaped out of
the shallow pit in which the gun had been hidden, and ran toward
the rear. But they had not gone far before they were wiped out of
existence by the explosion of a shell which fell right on top of them.

"Come on! Come on!" cried Jimmy, when it was seen that the machine-gun
was of no further use, since the weapon was damaged. Besides, the
American advance would soon be up to this point and it would be within
the Allied lines.

Forward leaped the five Brothers, into the midst of the fighting
again. And it was hot and heavy. They would advance a little, firing
as they went, and then would drop as they realized that they were
getting too close to danger. After a moment's rest they would rush on
again.

And these tactics were slowly but surely driving the Germans back.
True, now and again the Huns rallied, and beat back their foes, but
this was not for long. The overwhelming rush of the Americans kept up.

Once, after the battle had been raging with unabated fury for
two hours, Jimmy and his chums, with some other brave lads, found
themselves cut off in a sort of pocket, surrounded on three sides by
Germans.

With exultant yells a squad of Boches rushed up to capture the hated
Americans, but the five Brothers never quailed. They fired their
rifles straight into the faces of their enemies, killing several, and
then a counter-attack by a large number of Uncle Sam's boys turned
the tide of the fighting at that particular place, and our heroes were
saved.

With rattle and roar, with sweat and blood, the big battle raged. At
one time it seemed as if the American advance would be held up because
of determined resistance of the Germans on the crest of a certain
hill. This was stormed again and again without result. But at last the
position was flanked, and the Huns wiped out. Then the American line
was made straighter and the battle began to lull. The foe was in
retreat.

"Dig in! Dig in!" came the command.

With their picks and shovels Jimmy and his chums, as well as the
other fighters, began to scoop out for themselves shallow holes in the
ground. And when these had been made as deep as was desired the five
Brothers, who had come through the fierce fighting with but minor
scratches, had a chance to look about them.

They were down in a little valley, the heights of which were held
by their comrades, and so they were comparatively safe, for a while.
Realizing this they began to think of food and water. They had very
little left in their canteens, and as there was a stream, not far away
Jimmy and his chums received permission to go to fill their canteens
and bring some to the wounded.

As they finished this work of mercy, and had taken some water
themselves, Jimmy saw, through an opening among the trees, a lonely
hut not far from the bank of the little brook.

"Wonder if anyone is in there?" he said. "It might have been a German
machine-gun nest--just the place for one."

"There may be one there yet," suggested Bob. "Let's take a look. We've
got time."

The idea appealed to all, and, a few minutes later, secure in the
knowledge that the Germans were on the retreat, our heroes entered the
lonely shack. It appeared to have been the home of some French farmer,
though now everything about the place was laid waste.

"Nobody at home, I guess," commented Jimmy, as he went from one room
to another.

"No machine-gun been here," declared Bob.

At that instant an unmistakable groan was heard. The boys fairly
jumped.

"Some one's here now, that's evident!" declared Jimmy, starting toward
a small bedroom, whence, it was evident, the groan had sounded.

"Look out for a trick!" cried Roger. "The place may be mined!"

But Jimmy kept on. A second later his chums heard him shout from the
inner room, and rushing to his side they saw him gazing at a figure
huddled on a small cot bed.

"There he is!" cried Jimmy, pointing. "There he is! We've found him at
last!"

"Who?" asked Franz.

"Sergeant Maxwell!" was the startling answer. "There he is!"

And as the others looked more closely they saw that Jimmy was right.




CHAPTER XXIV

A GLORIOUS VICTORY


"How did he get here?"

"What happened to him?"

"Is he wounded?"

These were some of the questions that were, literally, fired at Jimmy
as he stood over the cot on which reposed the wasted and scarcely
recognizable form of Sergeant Maxwell. Jimmy's chums asked these
questions of him because, I suppose, they thought he ought to know the
answers.

"I don't know any more how poor Max got here, or what happened to him,
than you fellows do," said Jimmy.

"Is he hurt?" asked Bob.

"I'll ask him," said Jimmy. Bending over the form of the sergeant, who
was now tossing restlessly to and fro, Jimmy inquired: "Do you know
us, Max? Are you hurt? What happened to you?" An incoherent murmur was
the only answer.

"He's in a fever," said Roger, as he held his hand against the flushed
face. "He ought to be taken to the hospital!"

"Give him some water," suggested Franz, holding out his full canteen.

Jimmy raised his friend's head and Bob managed to get a little water
between the parched lips.

"Good! Good! I wanted water!" murmured the man somewhat indistinctly.
"I've wanted water a long time."

"Do you know us? I'm Jimmy Blazes, and here's Bob, Roger, Iggy and
Franz," said Jimmy. "Do you know us! Can you tell us where you've been
all this while, and what happened to you!"

"Good water! Good water!" was all the reply that came from poor
Maxwell.

"He's out of his head," said Bob.

"We'd better send a doctor if we can find one, or get him to a
hospital," suggested Roger.

"You go see if you can find any stretcher bearers, or a doctor or
anyone like that," suggested Jimmy to Franz and Iggy. "We'll stay with
him. Or Bob and I will. You'd better go report to the captain where we
are, Roger. He might think we've deserted."

Bob and Jimmy, left with Maxwell, made him as comfortable as they
could, washing his face and giving him more water to drink. But he
answered none of their questions, murmuring only about the cool water.
He was in a delirium of fever.

Of course Jimmy did not ask about the missing money. It would have
been useless at this time. But, naturally, he wondered if the sergeant
knew where it was.

Franz and Iggy came back with a doctor who, after a brief examination,
said the sergeant was suffering from bad treatment and lack of food
and water more than anything else. He did not seem to be wounded, but,
of course, there might be some internal hurt which did not show at the
first examination.

"Hospital's the place for him," decided the doctor. "Ill have him sent
back with the first batch of wounded."

And so poor Maxwell was rescued from the oblivion of "missing," and
again put on his company's rolls. But the mystery about him was not
solved, and over it Jimmy and his chums wondered much.

"Well, things have certainly turned out queerly!" remarked Jimmy, when
he and his chums were back once more in their "holes," eating their
emergency rations, and wondering when the real "chow" would come up.
"To thing of finding Max like that!"

"That place was held by the Germans before we rushed them back,"
declared Bob. "They might have kept him a prisoner."

"That's very possible," admitted Jimmy. "I'd like to know the whole
story, but we'll have to wait."

"And a long time, I'm afraid," added Roger.

"Why, do you think Max will die?" asked Franz.

"No, but this fight has only just started. We've got to go forward,
and land knows when we'll ever get back where we can see Max again."

"Oh, well, it isn't as hopeless as it was at first," remarked Jimmy.
"I'm not worrying about the thousand dollars--only I'd like to know
what he did with it."

As Roger had said, the fighting was not over. Before an order came to
turn the "holes" into trenches, another advance was ordered, so that
the Germans might be driven, if possible, from the vicinity of the
hills dominating the valley in which was located the hut where Maxwell
had been found.

"Forward!" came the battle cry again, and once more our heroes joined
the advance.

This time, however, the fighting was not quite so fierce. The Germans
had had a taste of the kind of medicine dealt out by the Americans, and
the Huns had no liking for it.

True, they did not give up without a struggle, and many a poor lad
went to his death, or came back from the front with a leg or arm
missing, as a result of the renewal of hostilities. But it had to be.
It would not have been safe to allow the Germans to have a chance to
get back the dominating hills won at such cost.

And there the storm of blood and steel was renewed with fiercer
energy, until at last, just as night was settling down, the German
flank was turned, and they began to retreat in what ultimately was a
rout.

"A glorious victory! A glorious victory!" was shouted from all sides
in the American ranks.

It was not the end of the war, by any means, but a dangerous salient
had been wiped out, and the American line was straightened, so that
now the fighting could go along on more even terms.

"Oh, but I am tired!" sighed Jimmy, as he flung himself full length
down on the ground when the signal came to cease firing.

"I'm all in, too," added Bob.

"But we're none of us hurt to any extent," said Franz, binding up a
place on his leg where a bit of shrapnel had grazed him. "Won't even
get a wound stripe for this," he said, grimly.

It was next morning, when the supply wagons had come up with more
substantial food, and hot rations, that the good news circulated
around.

"We're due for a rest billet! Hurray!"

"And then I'll have a chance to see about Sergeant Maxwell!" exclaimed
Jimmy.

That same day, following the one of such fierce fighting, the
battalion in which Jimmy and his chums served was ordered to the rear.
They would have a week's rest before going into the terrible game
again.

Jimmy's first action, once he had been relieved from active duty for
the time being, was to seek out the hospital whither Sergeant Maxwell
had been removed. He went alone, for he did not want to excite the
patient by taking in too many chums, should it prove that the man
who had held the five thousand francs was in a dangerous physical or
mental condition.

But, to Jimmy's relief, the doctor's and nurse's reports were
favorable. It was more a case of exhaustion than anything else, though
the sergeant had been wounded.

"Did he tell where he had been ever since he has been missing?" asked
Jimmy of a hospital attendant before going in himself to see his
friend.

"Well he remembered some of it. It seems he was captured while out
on a listening post one night, and taken away a prisoner. Instead of
sending him to a camp, as the Huns do with most of our poor chaps they
get, the Boches kept the sergeant with them, taking him from place to
place. It was their idea, I believe, to either force him to desert and
join them, or use him as a decoy--or perhaps make him a spy.

"Anyhow they kept him with them, and once he was struck and wounded by
a beast of a German officer. After that they neglected him and he got
terribly run down, though his wound healed. Then, just before the
last big fight--the one you say you were in--the sergeant was held
a prisoner in the hut where you found him. He was in a bad way and I
suppose the Germans thought he'd die when they left him--which they
did when our boys knocked the spots off 'em, if you'll excuse my
slang."

"Oh, I'll excuse it all right!" laughed Jimmy. "It isn't any too
strong."

"Well, I guess you may see the sergeant now," said the orderly. "Only
don't talk to him too much. He doesn't like to dwell on what happened
to him. They must have treated him worse than they would a beast!"

"It's awful!" declared Jimmy. "But they'll be made to pay for it! No,
I won't tax him with any talk of the past. I just want to see if he
knows me and remembers a certain matter."

"Oh, he'll know you all right," returned the orderly. "As a matter of
fact, he has been asking for you."

"That's a good sign!" thought Jimmy.

Sergeant Maxwell held out a wan hand to his friend. "I can't begin to
thank you for what you and the other boys did for me," he said, weakly.
"If you hadn't discovered me in that lonely hut I wouldn't be alive now."

"Oh, maybe someone else would have found you," said Jimmy, cheerfully.
"But we're glad we did."

"I've been wishing you'd come in," went on the sick sergeant. "There's
something that's been worrying me. It's about that five thousand
francs you gave me to keep for you."

"Well, don't worry about it," and Jimmy tried to keep his voice up to
the cheerful mark. "Have you got it?"

"No," said the sergeant, "I haven't. But--"

He paused to take a drink of water, and Jimmy's feelings went down to
about the zero position.

"But I know where it is," added the sergeant.

"I suppose the Germans took it off you."

"Indeed they didn't!" was the rather vigorous answer. "I didn't have
it on me. It's back in the dugout!"

"The dugout!" cried Jimmy, his spirits once more soaring.

"Yes, the one where I was quartered when you gave it to me. I knew we
were in for some hard fighting, so before I went out on listening post
I hid the franc notes in an old tin can and stuck it up under the roof
beams. It's right under where a picture of President Wilson is tacked
up. And if the dugout isn't destroyed the money is there yet."

"Well, the dugout can't be destroyed, for there haven't been any
Germans there in some time," said Jimmy. "And I do hope you're right
about the money being there. Not so much for my sake," he added
quickly, "but because I promised to whack up with my bunkies, and I
want to keep my word."

"Well, you send a message there and see if I'm not right," concluded
Maxwell, and then, being rather weak, he was ordered by the nurse to
take a rest.

Elated, but hardly believing the good news, Jimmy received permission
not only to send a message, but to go back in a motor truck to the
place where the headquarters of the 509th Infantry had been just
before the big advance.

Jimmy did not get back to his chums until late that night, for his
leave covered him up to midnight, and he was not on duty. He found
Iggy, Franz, Bob and Roger in a Y.M.C.A. hut, writing letters, and
from the labor Iggy was undergoing, his tongue sticking out and
following every movement of his pen, it was evident that the Polish
lad was not finding English correspondence any easier as the war
progressed.

"Where have you been, Blazes? Back home?" asked Bob a bit
sarcastically at Jimmy's absence.

"Sort of," was the answer. "That looks like stuff from home; doesn't
it!" and he threw on the table some crumpled and rather stained
thousand franc notes.

"Suffering shrapnel!" cried Bob. "The prize money!"

"Where'd you get it?"

"Did Max have it?"

"How'd you get it away from him?"

"How is he?"

"One at a time, please!" laughed Jimmy. "But first I'll tell you good
news--Max is going to get well," and he related the story he had heard
about the sergeant.

"Well, that's quite a yarn!" exclaimed Roger.

"However, that hasn't anything on what we're going to tell you, Jimmy
Blazes!" cried Bob Dalton excitedly.

"Have we all won the _croix de guerre_?" asked Jimmy, smiling.

"No, but here's a note from the 'spy' we denounced," and Jimmy, as
he accepted a paper Bob held out, wondered at the happy looks on the
faces of his chums.

It was explained, however, when he read the note. A glance at the
signature told him it was from "Captain Frank Dickerson."

"Boys, you only did your duty in exposing me, as you thought you did,"
wrote the officer. "I congratulate you on your nerve, and on doing
what you so plainly disliked to do, after I had saved your lives, as I
may flatter myself I did.

"So don't worry about me. I was only doing my duty, too, for Uncle Sam
when I was within the German lines and in a German uniform. And I
was also doing my duty when I was within your lines in an American
uniform. My superior officers know all about it. That is all I can
say now, except to add that I was not under arrest very long. But that
action had to be taken to keep my plans from becoming known, even to
the major. I hope to meet you all again."

"Say, what does it all mean?" asked Jimmy, to whom so many things
had happened in the last few hours that it was no wonder he was a bit
dazed. "What's all this talk about the government knowing he was in
German uniform and all that?"

"Don't you understand?" inquired Bob, with a smile. "He was a spy."

"Of course he was a spy!" asserted Jimmy. "I sized that up all right.
He was a spy inside our lines and--"

"Yes, but he was also a spy inside the German lines," put in Roger.
"Don't you understand, Blazes! Captain Dickerson wore the German
uniform to get possession of some of their secrets. He's in the United
States Secret Service."

Jimmy looked first at one and then at the other of his chums, until he
had faced them all in turn.

"Gee!" he exclaimed at length. "What a chump I was not to guess that,
when he acted so coolly after I denounced him! What a chump I was!"

"Oh, well, we couldn't guess everything," said Franz, "And he
certainly acted suspiciously at times."

"Yes, so I dinks myself," agreed Iggy, who had not spoken for some
time.

"Well, it's all over--at least we've cleared up two mysteries,"
observed Bob. "I wonder what will happen next?"

"Well, there's going to be more fighting; that's sure," declared
Jimmy, "and I want to do my share!"

"Same here!" echoed his chums.

And whether they did or not will be told in our next volume, entitled,
"The Khaki Boys Fighting to Win; or, Smashing the German Lines."

THE END





End of Project Gutenberg's The Khaki Boys Over the Top, by Gordon Bates

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE KHAKI BOYS OVER THE TOP ***

***** This file should be named 12957.txt or 12957.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/1/2/9/5/12957/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Jeni Warnken and PG Distributed
Proofreaders


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
